[Amit Varma]: So you've clicked play on this podcast and you notice that hey, this episode is over
[Amit Varma]: five and a half hours long.
[Amit Varma]: What's going on?
[Amit Varma]: Why does it need to be so long?
[Amit Varma]: People who discover this podcast for the first time often ask this question, though if they
[Amit Varma]: become regular listeners, they ask, why couldn't it have been longer?
[Amit Varma]: I wrote a post about this subject and I'll link it from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: But let me talk about one aspect of it for now.
[Amit Varma]: When I started the show, it was about ideas and analysis.
[Amit Varma]: The name of this podcast, The Seen and the Unseen, was inspired by Frederic Barcia's
[Amit Varma]: 19th century essay, That Which is Seen and That Which is Not Seen.
[Amit Varma]: The show, like the essay it was inspired from, was supposed to be about the unintended consequences
[Amit Varma]: of public policy.
[Amit Varma]: But then it evolved.
[Amit Varma]: And over the last few years, the focus has shifted from ideas to people, from interviews
[Amit Varma]: to conversations.
[Amit Varma]: Initially, I'd get an expert on a subject and talk about the subject.
[Amit Varma]: But those are dime a dozen on YouTube and other podcasts.
[Amit Varma]: I gradually stepped back and began speaking about my guests' life and influences.
[Amit Varma]: And in recent times, some of the longer episodes are oral histories, or you could even call
[Amit Varma]: them assisted self portraits.
[Amit Varma]: When you speak to someone about the life over a span of decades, you not only understand
[Amit Varma]: them better, but you also get glimpses of the changing world as it turns and burns.
[Amit Varma]: I love that aspect of the show, being able to live someone's life as seen in flashback
[Amit Varma]: and self reflection.
[Amit Varma]: Being able to unpeel layers of this complex world we live in.
[Amit Varma]: And going by the love I get from all of you, it's clear that many, many people want that
[Amit Varma]: kind of deep discursive conversation as well.
[Amit Varma]: So if you're new to this, and you start listening and think, hey, get to the point, well, there
[Amit Varma]: is no point.
[Amit Varma]: That is the point.
[Amit Varma]: I'll end this intro by saying thank you again to all the guests who've ever been on this
[Amit Varma]: show and have trusted me enough to set aside their filters and open themselves up to me.
[Unknown]: It's been a privilege and it's changed me as a person.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is my old and dear friend Nilanjana Roy.
[Amit Varma]: I first met Nilanjana in my blogging days, maybe 18 or 19 years ago, when she was already
[Amit Varma]: one of the most highly regarded book critics in the country, and even in the world as her
[Amit Varma]: fame grew through the interwebs.
[Amit Varma]: She wrote one of the longest running book columns in the world.
[Amit Varma]: I think it appeared in the business standard for over two decades.
[Amit Varma]: She's now a columnist for the Financial Times.
[Amit Varma]: She's edited various compilations.
[Amit Varma]: She's written two fabulous books of fantasy called The Wildings and The Hundred Names
[Amit Varma]: of Darkness.
[Amit Varma]: Her first literary novel for adults Black River is due out soon.
[Amit Varma]: That's a biography.
[Amit Varma]: What can I tell you about her?
[Amit Varma]: Well, one of the things that I admire about Nilanjana is what a good reader she is.
[Amit Varma]: She reads a lot.
[Amit Varma]: She reads well.
[Amit Varma]: She reads with intention.
[Amit Varma]: Her reading deepens her sense of self and informs how she looks at the world and writes
[Amit Varma]: about it.
[Amit Varma]: This is something I've always wanted to learn from her.
[Amit Varma]: Some of this love for reading and books comes out through her superb collection of essays,
[Amit Varma]: The Girl Who Ate Books.
[Amit Varma]: I'll refer to that and quote from that during this conversation, where we spoke about reading,
[Amit Varma]: yes, but also about feminism, family, freedom and about these times we live in.
[Amit Varma]: Before we get to it, though, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: And guess what?
[Amit Varma]: The commercial is also about reading.
[Amit Varma]: Use my code and subscribe to CTQ.
[Amit Varma]: Do you want to read more?
[Amit Varma]: I've put in a lot of work in recent years in building a reading habit.
[Amit Varma]: This means that I read more books, but I also read more long form articles and essays.
[Amit Varma]: There's a world of knowledge available through the internet.
[Amit Varma]: But the problem we all face is, how do we navigate this knowledge?
[Amit Varma]: How do we know what to read?
[Amit Varma]: How do we put the right incentives in place?
[Amit Varma]: Well, I discovered one way.
[Amit Varma]: A couple of friends of mine run this awesome company called CTQ Compounds at ctqcompounds.com,
[Amit Varma]: which aims to help people up level themselves by reading more.
[Amit Varma]: A few months ago, I signed up for one of their programs called The Daily Reader.
[Amit Varma]: Every day for six months, they sent me a long form article to read.
[Amit Varma]: The subjects covered went from machine learning to mythology to mental models and marmalade.
[Amit Varma]: This helped me build a habit of reading.
[Amit Varma]: At the end of every day, I understood the world a little better than I did before.
[Amit Varma]: So if you want to build your reading habit, head on over to CTQ Compounds and check out
[Amit Varma]: their Daily Reader.
[Amit Varma]: New batches start every month.
[Amit Varma]: They also have a great program called Future Stack, which helps you stay up to date with
[Amit Varma]: ideas, skills, and mental models that will help you stay relevant in the future.
[Amit Varma]: Future Stack batches start every Saturday.
[Amit Varma]: What's more, you get a discount of a whopping 2,500 rupees, 2,500 if you use the discount
[Amit Varma]: code UNSEEN.
[Amit Varma]: So head on over to CTQ Compounds at ctqcompounds.com and use the code UNSEEN.
[Amit Varma]: Uplevel yourself.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you
[Amit Varma]: So I'm glad we're finally getting to do this because I think I've been sort of asking you
[Amit Varma]: for a while and you've been busy writing your books but finally here we are.
[Guest]: I have to apologize for that it's just been a couple of years the last three years I think
[Guest]: has been pretty full on both with the writing and then personal loss and for a while I don't
[Guest]: think I was in a space where I wanted to speak as much as I wanted to listen and your podcast
[Guest]: was a great comfort in that time.
[Guest]: We have so few shows that actually give people a little time to you know sprawl.
[Guest]: Usually you have your eye on the clock with the conversation and you're thinking 20 minutes,
[Guest]: four questions, 45 minutes so much.
[Guest]: You see what I mean?
[Guest]: And I'm going to try very hard not to be going to interviewer mode though the questions that
[Guest]: I wanted to ask you were things like you know why why did you decide that we needed this
[Guest]: the sprawl of time, the slowness, this getting into things, spending a fair amount of an
[Guest]: afternoon or a morning or an evening with your guests.
[Guest]: I've enjoyed it as a listener.
[Amit Varma]: In a very sleek way and a very slinky way you turn the tables on me but yeah to get
[Amit Varma]: you warmed up yeah sure this is a conversation.
[Amit Varma]: It sort of evolved that way in the sense that initially my sense was that you know people
[Amit Varma]: have short attention spans a 20 minute podcast is perfect you got to grab them in the first
[Amit Varma]: few seconds all of those things and I realized I was wrong for three reasons which I've sort
[Amit Varma]: of spoken about and written about so much in the past that it'll be a repetition for
[Amit Varma]: many of my listeners but the reasons being that one people tend to listen when they are
[Amit Varma]: a captive audience so people will listen to podcasts or audiobooks when they are either
[Amit Varma]: commuting or working out or doing errands like washing dishes and so on.
[Amit Varma]: So you know when you're watching a video on YouTube you can just go to another tab or
[Amit Varma]: change the window or turn your head and talk to someone who's standing there pick up a
[Amit Varma]: book from the table but if you're jogging you're jogging you're not going to start doing
[Amit Varma]: something else so one you're a captive audience two people listen at higher speeds which is
[Amit Varma]: easy to do because our normal speaking speed is between 150 to 200 words a minute I speak
[Amit Varma]: at about 160 because I'm a middle-aged man now I'm a little slow but our brain can comprehend
[Amit Varma]: language at 500 words a minute so actually it's really easy to listen at higher speeds
[Amit Varma]: and the way to do it is people might think oh it's squeaky and I'll miss nuances and
[Amit Varma]: all of that actually you don't at all because your brain adjusts so if you take it to 1.2
[Amit Varma]: wait for it to normalize take it to 1.5 so on and so forth like I can listen to stuff
[Amit Varma]: between 2.5 to 3x and not lose any nuance not lose any pauses any gaps because the brain
[Amit Varma]: just adjusts and processes them that way and the third important reason is that I think
[Amit Varma]: in modern times people crave depth and the thing is it's not that there are two kinds
[Amit Varma]: of people in the world and the one kind has short attention span one kind doesn't I think
[Amit Varma]: everyone has a short attention span for a lot of the time so there might be times where
[Amit Varma]: I am constantly distracted and looking at my smartphone and you can't really hold my
[Amit Varma]: attention but there are also times where I want to sit down and go deep and media today
[Amit Varma]: unfortunately because there's a race to the bottom it it's it's a mile wide and an inch
[Amit Varma]: deep as our mutual friend Prem Panicker says so eloquently and people get that and people
[Amit Varma]: crave depth and they value depth which I've discovered through the love I get from my
[Amit Varma]: listeners and I think it's in a sense and this is a theme we'll surely talk about in
[Amit Varma]: your context as well but I think just shifting forms not just changes the work that you do
[Amit Varma]: but it also changes a person that you are it makes like for me I think I'm and I was
[Amit Varma]: discussing this in an episode I released I recorded yesterday with Pradeep magazine it'll
[Amit Varma]: probably release after this but you know and where I was talking about how it's made me
[Amit Varma]: less judgmental and more open to listening to people and getting involved in their stories
[Amit Varma]: like you know Stephen Covey once said that we don't listen to understand we listen to
[Amit Varma]: respond which is a really bad thing I mean to have a good conversation you have to kind
[Amit Varma]: of put your ego out of it and just sit down and listen and I think doing this has taught
[Amit Varma]: me to do that and Pradeep in different ways also shared how the last 10 years have made
[Amit Varma]: him much less judgmental which reflects in this beautiful memoir that he's written called
[Amit Varma]: not just cricket which is an episode that will come after this so people can hear that
[Amit Varma]: and I've been reflecting about this as well I've been you know doing a fair bit of sort
[Amit Varma]: of self-reflection on how the work that you do can change who you are and the work that
[Amit Varma]: you do is shaped so much by the form and you have also worked across different forms in
[Amit Varma]: your life done different kinds of reading different kinds of writing so you know although
[Amit Varma]: this was not something I planned specifically to ask but what are your thoughts on this
[Guest]: I'm picking up on some of the words that you've used because they are exactly what I wanted
[Guest]: to talk about today it's that ache for depth it's not just a need for depth or a sense
[Guest]: that we have that missing in our lives somewhere the more frantic that we get the more time
[Guest]: we are spending on Twitter social media keeping up it's not just social media you know to
[Guest]: be honest the world makes you feel like you have to keep running to stand still and just
[Guest]: just to be in the swim and whether it's news or whether it's your lives there's no emphasis
[Guest]: on pausing you know there's just you're supposed to consume one experience after the other
[Guest]: just the way that you consume the news and there's this constant frantic cry of next
[Guest]: next next I've spent much to my surprise I think a lifetime of moving around a lot between
[Guest]: jobs not settling to one kind of writing one kind of job but grounded fundamentally in
[Guest]: reading and writing I don't think I intended that to happen but it's been if you think
[Guest]: about it this way in this ocean that's constantly tugging you this way or that way my reading
[Guest]: in different languages different bodies of work different kinds of things has been like
[Guest]: a sheet anchor it's something that you can return to at any point of time in your life
[Guest]: no matter how grievous the world around you is and your reading also challenges you at
[Guest]: some point to seek a certain kind of depth you know that libraries have long been used
[Guest]: as parallel schools or colleges in the depression American libraries became places where people
[Guest]: taught themselves skills and they did that by reading 30 books and on the subject and
[Guest]: they found their subject basically by walking into this huge cathedral of books practically
[Guest]: and asking themselves a simple question what am I curious about what am I interested in
[Guest]: the other thing that you've touched about the fact that your work changes you I get
[Guest]: asked so often about writing by people who see it as who used to see it at least as a
[Guest]: pathway to a certain kind of success or celebrity or stability and they really want to have
[Guest]: written their books and each time I want to I really want to beg them to sit down and
[Guest]: enjoy the writing itself you know to sit there quietly with the page and with whatever you're
[Guest]: working on and to discover yourself as a writer or discover yourself as a reader as well for
[Guest]: me what am I doing these days I've just finished a novel Black River which is probably the
[Guest]: first novel I've written for an entirely adult audience my two books before that the Wildings
[Guest]: and the Hundred Names of Darkness well could go either way my youngest reader was six years
[Guest]: old and my oldest reader was 92 years old a Spanish biker you know who sent me pictures
[Guest]: of himself with his two cats beautiful yeah that is the joy of being a writer actually
[Guest]: you never know who you're going to reach and if you're in a rush to get to some page three
[Guest]: success or to get on to the TV shows or to be invited to the Jaipur Literature Festival
[Guest]: as fun as all those things are that's not what the work is about you know and I want
[Guest]: to tell people to to learn to take their time with whatever it is that they're doing whether
[Guest]: it's with a book or with an author the pleasure of immersion that's the word that we are looking
[Guest]: for really you know immersion is difficult because everything else in our modern life
[Guest]: mitigates against it it says that when you've reached a place you need to rush to reach
[Guest]: the other place if you've traveled to so many countries you need to go somewhere else and
[Guest]: yet it's only by standing still and holding on whatever it is that I admire in my life
[Guest]: whether it's specific writers specific books or whether it's the freedom struggle you know
[Guest]: I'm struck by how much Nehru, Gandhi, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, Sarojini Naidu, Aruna Asif Ali
[Guest]: all of them how much time they actually spent thinking about what went into a national movement
[Guest]: and trying to visualize independence Gloria Steinem I'm jumping like crazy so you'll have
[Guest]: to call me back at some point but Gloria Steinem says that one of the tasks ahead of us is
[Guest]: how to imagine a new world and she doesn't say you know how to bring that new world into
[Guest]: being that's a later task or whatever but truly if you cannot imagine a better reality
[Guest]: a better life then how you're going to reach that and you're not going to be able to get
[Guest]: to that point if you're constantly racing from one action to another it's not just about
[Guest]: slowing down it's about what you're slowing down for right so when you get back to your
[Guest]: early experiences of reading often we rush into what was your first book but most people's
[Guest]: early experiences of reading are actually of being told a story you know of listening
[Guest]: when you're very very small very young and that is the ultimate slowness because you're
[Guest]: sitting there you're quiet but you're not passive you're taking in something and you're
[Guest]: learning to imagine for the first time in your very very young life this world that
[Guest]: doesn't actually exist before your eyes I've looked at that and I think one of the big
[Guest]: themes that I keep coming back to is why in all these centuries do we keep reaching for
[Guest]: story why do we keep reaching for myths why is it that pretty much from the dawn of humanity
[Guest]: one of the first things we do is not just live in the world but we reach for stories
[Guest]: to try and explain what kind of world it is that we live in you know the oldest books
[Guest]: and the oldest tales go back to the dawn of humanity itself and I find that incredibly
[Guest]: moving and slightly surreal that we can sit here so many centuries later and still fully
[Guest]: understand and be moved by something like the epic of Gilgamesh you know which was the
[Guest]: first written epic or we can relate to the Mahabharata and the Ramayana whatever your
[Guest]: own epics are we can relate to them as though they were written yesterday you know it's
[Guest]: that universal people just reach across the centuries all the time with writing so a number
[Amit Varma]: of things I want to kind of double click on and kind of go a little deeper and one of
[Amit Varma]: them comes from two of the things that you mentioned just now one is of course how you
[Amit Varma]: know that Therav has gone from our lives where we can just sit and think about stuff and
[Amit Varma]: not just go from sensation to sensation and so on and so forth and the other is what you
[Amit Varma]: said about our freedom fighters having the time to you know to sit and think about stuff
[Amit Varma]: you know Nehru writing all that he did in jail in such eloquent language without a library
[Amit Varma]: available to him and so on and so forth one TIL moment I had about our modern times came
[Amit Varma]: from Jonathan Haidt when he said that even though we have all of literature and all of
[Amit Varma]: knowledge available to us at the click of a mouse most of what we are consuming was
[Amit Varma]: produced in the last three days right so we go from sensation to sensation to sensation
[Amit Varma]: to sensation and that quietitude is not there like you know when you and I were growing
[Amit Varma]: up we had a lot of me time and we had a lot of me time because there was no option there
[Amit Varma]: weren't so many things to do you know we read a lot why did we read a lot because there
[Amit Varma]: was so few books available to us that we read everything we could kind of grab hold of I
[Amit Varma]: mean you and I were perhaps much more privileged and fortunate in this regard but for most
[Amit Varma]: people and so many of my guests of our vintage you're just reading everything indiscriminately
[Amit Varma]: that you can get hold of and you have the time to sit down and think and you know like
[Amit Varma]: you said like I once wrote a column about you know that old lament about how did we
[Amit Varma]: have such great leaders in the 20s 30s 40s even 50s and today the quality of politician
[Amit Varma]: is what it is and my theory about that was that was an economic theory which is that
[Amit Varma]: it boils down to incentives that the great freedom fighters all the people you named
[Amit Varma]: you know there was no power at the end of the line for them so they weren't lusting
[Amit Varma]: for power they were animated by higher principles and that calling attracted the kind of people
[Amit Varma]: who were animated by higher principles and that's why you got all the people that you
[Amit Varma]: did your Nehru, your Ambedkar, your Sarojini Naidu and so on and today it's you know people
[Amit Varma]: are not attracted to politics for that reason for higher principles they are attracted for
[Amit Varma]: the lust for power and money and so on but I think that the reason that you know if I
[Amit Varma]: were to add a second reason to that I think what you just said is a great reason that
[Amit Varma]: in an earlier generation you had the scope for quiet reflection even if you didn't have
[Amit Varma]: all the libraries of the world sort of available to you and it strikes me that today to be
[Amit Varma]: able to reflect in that way it has to be an act of will where an individual says I want
[Amit Varma]: to put my smartphone away I want to put the laptop away I want to sit and reflect earlier
[Amit Varma]: it was almost default that you reflect a lot of the time because what else is there to
[Amit Varma]: do but now we are just going from sensation to sensation picking picking up our smartphones
[Amit Varma]: 20 times an hour you know chasing the dopamine hit of the latest notification or Facebook
[Amit Varma]: like and for most people therefore you are just you're just kind of trapped in this what
[Amit Varma]: are your sort of thoughts on this have you found yourself fighting it yourself like I
[Amit Varma]: have you know have you found yourself fighting it yourself and is this something therefore
[Amit Varma]: that you would lament like I think we would both agree that it's almost miraculous and
[Amit Varma]: magical that so much knowledge is available to us at the click of a mouse but this is
[Guest]: a downside so what are your sort of thoughts I'm very of nostalgia I think we all are because
[Guest]: we tend to put an Instagram filter on the past to some extent but when I look back at
[Guest]: my childhood the kind of childhoods that many of us had it seems impossibly idyllic because
[Guest]: it was uncluttered I think there was extraordinary privilege for me not just in terms of caste
[Guest]: majority religion coming from a reasonably affluent background but there was extraordinary
[Guest]: privilege for me in the incredible luck of being born into a family where books art music
[Guest]: and all of that were prized they were not coveted they were not collected they were
[Guest]: just seen as these wondrous things that made your everyday duty-bound ritualistic life
[Guest]: that much more not just enjoyable but it you know reaching for whatever it was that you
[Guest]: were reaching for a ballet performance in Delhi, Spik Mckay concerts, your own culture
[Guest]: in Bengali whatever it was it was understood that this added a layer of deep meaning to
[Guest]: life and I think I was very fortunate to grow up in two households one in Calcutta one in
[Guest]: Delhi where we were surrounded with books because people would rather collect them than
[Guest]: refurbish the furniture I took that for granted but let me describe what a Delhi childhood
[Guest]: was like at that time this was in a key part of the 1970s and mothers used to by and large
[Guest]: it was a time when women were just starting to work outside the home so unfortunately
[Guest]: most of these were mothers and mothers used to turn their children out of the house after
[Guest]: school like puppies you know to play in open spaces and used to roam fearlessly through
[Guest]: many of your neighborhoods and this went across class by the way this was true for small
[Guest]: mohalla neighborhoods in model town and this was true for government colonies like Chanakya
[Guest]: Puri where I grew up or Lodhi colony or whatever there'd be somebody sitting out on a chaat
[Guest]: by somewhere and you'd wander around in and out of each other's houses and so the part
[Guest]: of it that was not bookish was balanced by a tremendous activity you know I climbed trees
[Guest]: I fell out of them I climbed roofs I fell off them this this is by the way something
[Guest]: of a running theme in my life and I think we thought nothing of running around a space
[Guest]: that would have been easily 10 kilometers square you know we knew every quadrangle we
[Guest]: dreamed of secret passages in Palam airfield which was nearby we knew which parts had jackals
[Guest]: and were to be avoided and which parts were actually a little more friendly and there
[Guest]: was a sugarcane stand in that field that we all avoided because the Cobras used to live
[Guest]: there and we avoided it without fear you know the natural world the bookish world the outdoors
[Guest]: world they all flowed into and through each other even when television came in which would
[Guest]: have been roughly the end of the 70s early 80s programs were screened in the evening
[Guest]: and they were mind-numbingly boring to begin with yeah absolutely you know the old the
[Guest]: golden age of television was a little further down the line when Buniyad and Humlog and
[Guest]: all that good stuff happened so we lived a very active life not a passive life how do
[Guest]: I struggle with this all the time I still find it difficult to avoid the stickiness
[Guest]: of Twitter but I think I've grown better at just putting the phone off the phone is the
[Guest]: biggest thing you know that anxiety of I'll miss out if I don't see a message right now
[Guest]: and you have to train yourself to moving into it's fine it's fine to respond to something
[Guest]: even three days later nothing is that urgent really you know except for okay editorial
[Guest]: deadlines or something of the sort but even that you can train yourself to just check
[Guest]: in with the phone once or twice a day and that opens up space for you to check in on
[Guest]: everything else you know otherwise we spend I think what we're pushing back against is
[Guest]: something that was also not true of the early web you know you're enough of an 80s 90s I
[Guest]: mean I think I just touched on what a childhood in the 1970s was like an Indian childhood
[Guest]: was never fully idyllic but you know things like the emergency which happened when I was
[Guest]: very very young 97 98 suddenly it seemed to you that the walls were speaking in admonitory
[Guest]: tones or because children pick up hypocrisy very fast there were these bright breezy songs
[Guest]: you know which means remove the garbage and somewhere in there an uneasy prickle which
[Guest]: told you even as a child that something else was supposed to be cleaned up and removed
[Guest]: and you weren't very comfortable with what that something was you didn't know that it
[Guest]: was people and their homes that were being removed I was born in 1971 so somewhere you
[Guest]: know we always valorize our own births and I think in my memory my birth goes hand in
[Guest]: hand with the story of the Bangladesh war a time when Mrs. Gandhi was probably at the
[Guest]: height of her popularity seen as this strong and immensely capable leader and it's something
[Guest]: of a lesson to us that just five years later she took India into its first not last experiment
[Guest]: with authoritarianism but as a child you know what you're processing all of this in as this
[Guest]: duality of immense security which lasted right up to the Billa Ranga murder of those two
[Guest]: the brother and sister Geeta and Sanjay and we so used now in a huge megalopolis which
[Guest]: is what Delhi has become and Bombay has become that we forget what a shock something like
[Guest]: that sends out you know the ripples of sadness and shared grief and collective mourning that
[Guest]: happens when a city is a smaller more intimate space in the 1970s Delhi was still a collection
[Guest]: of villages held together by a substrate of government colonies and you know vague optimism
[Guest]: again in memory it's important to just keep looking back and looking back further because
[Guest]: nostalgia is always cut through with its opposite right so 1947 which was India's independence
[Guest]: was remembered by the generation after that in story and in memory it was a living memory
[Guest]: but so was partition you know and early on I think one thing we learned about living
[Guest]: in this country we knew that because of the years of the British Empire the rule of the
[Guest]: British Empire we knew that we didn't live in the first world we lived in the third world
[Guest]: we knew that empirically speaking we lived in a very poor country that was struggling
[Guest]: to fill its treasuries again and I think for my generation some of the respect for the
[Guest]: leaders we had right after independence comes from that space it's not so much what we think
[Guest]: of today you know worship of a particular political party or allegiance the tribal thing
[Guest]: it is more a genuine respect and wonder for the fact that India bucked what everybody
[Guest]: expected of the country foreign correspondents expected India to fall apart in five years
[Guest]: and then 10 years and 15 years and you know it seemed every decade that somebody was ringing
[Guest]: the doom in the 1980s again Indira Gandhi's assassination the trouble in Punjab all of
[Guest]: that the riots in Delhi everything is something that you live through you know you feel it
[Guest]: on your skin and through that what happens is that books become a way of understanding
[Guest]: the far past recent history and also a comfort and a refuge I know I've traveled very far
[Guest]: from where we expect it to be but you know maybe we keep circling back to this whole
[Guest]: thing of reading and I just want to take a moment to say something that surprised me
[Guest]: when I studied as in not studied but just read about the freedom struggle was how many
[Guest]: of our leaders from Maulana Azad to Ramanohar Lohia to the ones we've just named set a great
[Guest]: store by reading and building their own libraries and once I sat down for a column I was writing
[Guest]: for the business standard which is the first place that opened its doors to me and gave
[Guest]: me the space to be a columnist at the then you know ridiculously young age of 22-23 they
[Guest]: really made me into a journalist but one of the columns I did for them was about the libraries
[Guest]: of the leaders of the national movement and you start going through those books you know
[Guest]: 3,000 of them 4,000 of them Gandhi's collection Nehru's collection and you start to see that
[Guest]: they use books to really read their way into the whole question of what is freedom and
[Guest]: what is our independent country going to be and it's so fascinating that they reached
[Guest]: all the way across you know Gandhi read American early vegetarians for inspiration along with
[Guest]: stories about the Europe reformation and all of that and then they circled back to their
[Guest]: own country their own language and come up with an extremely particular very Indian approach
[Guest]: to democracy none of that is accidental you know I don't think there was a point of time
[Guest]: at which they valorized reading in their own minds or they said this is a good thing to
[Guest]: do or was self-conscious about it it's just that I find it so touching that the two things
[Guest]: that they did all through the years of the freedom struggle from the 1900s onwards they
[Guest]: wrote letters furiously you know our sense of the past really has to change we think
[Guest]: that we so cool with our Twitter updates and our blog posts and everything but if you start
[Guest]: to look at those gigantic volumes of correspondence you realize that even on his silent days Gandhi
[Guest]: spent so much time you know composing these swift emails these notes to himself he spent
[Guest]: a life in writing Saroji Naidu moving between the poems and the speeches where her auditory
[Guest]: which today seems to us to be a little flowery and a little overblown for that time though
[Guest]: it was deep with emotion you know and she could hold audiences in the palm of her hand
[Guest]: as such and you see that the before they were leaders who were they you know this is a question
[Guest]: I keep going back to with everything before we were authors before we identified ourselves
[Guest]: as whatever what was it that we were moving towards and you see those early whispers of
[Guest]: self-respect of challenging the history that you've been given and saying that no you know
[Guest]: the British did not make us a whole and a collective and a people the land and the history
[Guest]: of the land does not fully make us Indians because we did not think of ourselves as Indians
[Guest]: before that but here we are at this moment in time and we can literally imagine ourselves
[Guest]: into being I think it's remarkable that the Constitution which is a written document after
[Guest]: all you know everywhere after a while when I saw the freedom struggle slightly differently
[Guest]: I started to see it as a thing that was held together not just by protests as important
[Guest]: as they were and by actions but by breath and speech and writing and imagining you really
[Guest]: have to imagine a country into being you know that's the other side of being a nation okay
[Guest]: I've gotten my soapbox long enough I need to shut up and give you a chance to. Lots
[Amit Varma]: to think about like Joan Didion once said I don't know what I think until I write it
[Amit Varma]: down and when you speak of you know all the letters these people wrote and a lot of it
[Amit Varma]: is online like the hundred volumes of Gandhi's collected writings online and they're just
[Amit Varma]: fascinating one little collection that I especially love is his correspondence with Tagore where
[Amit Varma]: they're writing to each other all the time disagreeing but so full of love for each other
[Guest]: you know so different from the discourse today and Amit have we lost that I don't don't mean
[Guest]: you to lose the thread but just in parenthesis have we lost that the ability to disagree
[Guest]: over even a long period of time even passionately but to disagree without hating each other
[Guest]: without putting each other down and coming back to what you said continuing that ability
[Amit Varma]: to listen anyway I'm just putting that I'll come back to that but my short answer is yes
[Amit Varma]: but I'll come back to that and we'll explore it and let me let me you know you can disagree
[Amit Varma]: with me and we'll still be friends but yeah but my thread was that and this is again something
[Amit Varma]: I spoke of I think with Amitabh Kumar in my episode with him and with again our mutual
[Amit Varma]: friend Chandrahas Chaudhary though that's not released yet but the thought actually
[Amit Varma]: came to me when Chandrahas once wrote me an email I sent him an email into inviting him
[Amit Varma]: to the show and he sent me this long charming reply which was like a letter of yore you
[Amit Varma]: know when you'd sit down and you'd write three-page letters two-page letters you know with memories
[Amit Varma]: and you remember we were in Pune and we had samosa at that place and all of that so such
[Amit Varma]: a rich letter and that got me to thinking about correspondence that when I was younger
[Amit Varma]: before the internet I would also write letters you know I have also written letters to my
[Amit Varma]: parents talking about you know talking at length about anything at all but talking at
[Amit Varma]: length which is the whole point and this goes back to the question I asked earlier about
[Amit Varma]: how form can shape the content can shape the person because when you are writing a letter
[Amit Varma]: you are giving yourself in to a certain kind of reflection to a certain kind of thought
[Amit Varma]: today we are an age where everything is a two-line email or it's an you know you're
[Amit Varma]: sending an emoji by whatsapp and everything is crisp and everything is instrumental and
[Amit Varma]: it's very rare that we are doing that kind of considered communication with each other
[Amit Varma]: and the act of writing a letter to someone is not just an act of sitting and having to
[Amit Varma]: flesh out your thoughts again going back to Diddy and I don't know what I think until
[Amit Varma]: I write it down so the act of fleshing out your thoughts and therefore discovering what
[Amit Varma]: you think in a sense and discovering yourself but it is also the act of giving respect to
[Amit Varma]: another person you know giving that time that you're sitting down and you're writing a letter
[Amit Varma]: to someone and that means that person is important and today you don't have that even as a signaling
[Amit Varma]: device of someone's importance you don't have that but more than that you no longer have
[Amit Varma]: that space to kind of sit down and reflect everything is so short instrumental crisp
[Amit Varma]: and it's great that we can just reach out to each other you know anytime we want and
[Amit Varma]: all of that but do you know just with not being nostalgic for a particular form of writing
[Amit Varma]: but just in terms of the larger meta question of does it then change us as a society because
[Amit Varma]: the form has changed because we no longer have those moments of quiet and reflection
[Amit Varma]: and because we are no longer making those kinds of mental efforts and because the rhythms
[Amit Varma]: of our life are much more much choppier and much quicker I see where you're going with
[Guest]: this and it's not just the time to sit down and think and reflect because you can write
[Guest]: letters at high speed as well but it's more like the kind of speed that's expected in
[Guest]: Twitter exchanges you have to address something now and in that moment of a controversy exploding
[Guest]: the urgency is sharp and immediate but by tomorrow everyone's forgotten so one of the
[Guest]: biggest problems we have is that we live in a state of perpetual amnesia right and when
[Guest]: you have that as an affliction for society you are no longer in touch with your own psyche
[Guest]: your own self right with letters I'm going to answer this a little discursively but I
[Guest]: still have letters that I wrote to my school friends years ago and sometimes those contain
[Guest]: years and years of correspondence and then you can mark the moment when emails arrived
[Guest]: because suddenly the letters stop our first emails this was when you had stuff like Hotmail
[Guest]: and Lycos around yeah our first emails for the first few years are really long we're
[Guest]: trying to go back to letters in a sense because that's what we are familiar with and I noticed
[Guest]: this years later when I was printing out my Lycos mailbox before dispatching that account
[Guest]: unconsciously we were all from India writing to inland letter form length you know if I
[Guest]: don't know whether this generation would remember that but unconsciously your mind was trained
[Guest]: to three landscapes you were trained to write the postcard you were trained to write inland
[Guest]: letter forms and you were trained to write the free-flowing letter for which you would
[Guest]: buy onion skin paper you know and you'd dwell on your envelopes and it was very important
[Guest]: also to go to the post office and say sir sir if Gandhiji ki stamp mat dena doosra stamp
[Guest]: dena Asia at Games ki stamp hai aapke paas you know you wanted the stamps to be as fancy
[Guest]: as the letters were we used to covet the bird stamps and all of that so there were so many
[Guest]: parts to the letter it wasn't just writing it it was wait for the ink to dry tear up
[Guest]: this draft because you have said too much from your heart you know to a boyfriend or
[Guest]: something of the sort and put it back in and then put it into the envelope put the stamp
[Guest]: down then all the secret little hearts and flowers that the women used to write to each
[Guest]: other you know so all of that Tehzeeb all of that ritual and everything goes away at
[Guest]: some point we find ways to bring it back but I remember some years ago when my friend Margaret
[Guest]: Mascarinehurst who was an incredible writer and poet in Goa when she died it was a sad
[Guest]: thing to have only whatsapp messages to archive you know because we met in person the whatsapp
[Guest]: messages became they served a different purpose then they became like little pointers whatsapp
[Guest]: to each other about this on this day and then suddenly a memory of a conversation would
[Guest]: open up but they really know more than memorial aids you know thumbnails they don't have the
[Guest]: satisfaction that accompanies letter writing but right now if you ask this generation take
[Guest]: some time out you might get people to do one letter who is going to sit down and do the
[Guest]: full chain you know that business of you set aside some time every week to write letters
[Guest]: you go on holiday and you write a letter that also indicates a certain faith in we've been
[Guest]: talking about speed and the amnesia and the other part of it let us bespeak a kind of
[Guest]: permanence and a faith in the record so somewhere unconsciously as our handwriting has gone
[Guest]: I think we've also it's I wouldn't call it a cause but I would say it's gone hand in
[Guest]: hand with this very modern lack of faith in the historical record you see what I mean
[Guest]: when everything is impermanent and everything dissolves and everything can be killed once
[Guest]: a particular social media platform shuts down you can use lose years and years of photographs
[Guest]: and notes if Facebook goes tomorrow or you can lose 40,000 tweets written over 10 years
[Guest]: if Twitter goes tomorrow and somehow increasingly these interactions I'm still on Twitter because
[Guest]: that hook is there you know what is that hook it's partly the fear of missing out it's partly
[Guest]: and this is the nice side of it the desire to keep in touch with people who are there
[Guest]: but partly and this is the dangerous side of it we all think we immune and we are not
[Guest]: it doesn't matter how smart you are but social media the way it is formulated in present
[Guest]: days is built to be sticky we know that you know I can spend five minutes on Twitter fine
[Guest]: if I spend half an hour on Twitter my days gone and after a while my moods my emotions
[Guest]: those very intimate personal things have changed instead if you train yourself to back away
[Guest]: and to use it then you lose what we had when we first found Twitter if you remember Twitter
[Guest]: was all about finding a new way of expressing yourself and that's also what the first-generation
[Guest]: web was about Hussein Deirakshan who's the Iranian blogger who went through an incredible
[Guest]: and very saddening experience he was held in jail for many years and when he came out
[Guest]: among the many dislocations he faced was a real sense that the world itself had changed
[Guest]: because the net as he knew it the World Wide Web had changed beyond recognition and he
[Guest]: was one of the first people to write about the fact that when you had blogs they created
[Guest]: a universe of islands that were linked but you weren't you weren't content does that
[Guest]: make sense that makes a lot of sense yeah and today I think when everything is being
[Guest]: massaged into content and brands and all of that and I'm absolutely not averse to the
[Guest]: pursuit of success through writing all the things all I want to say is that there are
[Guest]: deeper satisfactions you know writing just isn't just about having a best-selling book
[Guest]: out there or having the great career or whatever if you really want to write a lot of writers
[Guest]: started off telling stories or being part of the weave of having stories told to them
[Guest]: in my case it was my mother who became a lawyer at the age of 39 but before that you know
[Guest]: she used to do these incredible bedtime stories where she'd look at whatever the pattern was
[Guest]: on our curtains or whatever shadows there were on the wall and make up things about
[Guest]: that and you don't even realize you don't use the formal words my imagination is being
[Guest]: trained but what you learn is double at this point you learn that you are absolutely free
[Guest]: to use your imagination in whichever way you want to and you also learn that even adults
[Guest]: you know even parents even these people who have so much power over you have wonderful
[Guest]: secret lives so right from the start what you start to learn is the importance of having
[Guest]: this private self this individual self and if I may say so this whinely creative self
[Guest]: I live in fear that creativity will become another one of those buzzwords you know but
[Guest]: the truth is I think something we've been talking about for years and years among ourselves
[Guest]: or whatever is with privilege without privilege how do you live lives that are more fully
[Guest]: creative and I don't mean just formally creative I don't mean that you have to be a writer
[Guest]: in the sense that you have to publish books so you have to be an artist in the sense of
[Guest]: you have to have a painting exhibition I'm not talking about the outcome or the productivity
[Guest]: but I'm saying a life of consumption which is what we increasingly have been driven towards
[Guest]: consumption not just in terms of buying things that you then show off but in terms of your
[Guest]: most intimate moments are held out for display or that your identity is as a clever consumer
[Guest]: of life right if you shift that paradigm just a little bit and I mean by the way you really
[Amit Varma]: have to stop me when I start going down segways or whatever I love these segways and I will
[Guest]: never stop you I think right from the start I've been asking myself even from early childhood
[Guest]: what does it mean to be truly creative because to me that is the life that humans derive
[Guest]: the most not even pleasure not even benefit from but that's where we are at our best we
[Amit Varma]: are creative animals no and and what you were saying earlier about you know letters in history
[Amit Varma]: the connection reminds me of this Agha Shahid Ali quote which you've quoted in your book
[Amit Varma]: as well my memory gets in the way of your history and that sort of feels so apt and
[Amit Varma]: again what you you know the point you made about Twitter is you know that for five minutes
[Amit Varma]: is okay for half an hour it destroys your day and that's literally what it does because
[Amit Varma]: it changes the rhythm of your brain because the rhythm of your brain is doing hop skip
[Amit Varma]: step jump duck duck duck duck is going like that instead of being in a quieter place so
[Amit Varma]: you might want to you know do two hours of focused work on whatever it is but if you
[Amit Varma]: put your brain in that quick rhythm where you're skipping from one thing to the other
[Amit Varma]: then it becomes difficult you know it's probably better to begin the day by meditation or something
[Amit Varma]: but except that I don't do meditation I do Twitter which is a problem my next question
[Amit Varma]: is about a subject that you know I spoke about with my guest last week and I've been thinking
[Amit Varma]: about it a lot and it relates to a few things that you've said today I read this wonderful
[Amit Varma]: book called wanting by Luke Burgess and you know Burgess is sort of a disciple and intellectual
[Amit Varma]: disciple of Ren Girard the philosopher and Girard was once a few decades ago asked he's
[Amit Varma]: a philosopher but he was asked to teach a course on literature and he needed the money
[Amit Varma]: so he said okay I'll do it and he read through whatever he thought was a reading list and
[Amit Varma]: the books he wanted to talk about and he discovered that the one thing he they all had in common
[Amit Varma]: and he was probably being simplistic here I'm not sure I agree but it's still a profound
[Amit Varma]: point he felt that the one thing all the characters had in common was that they wanted something
[Amit Varma]: not because they intrinsically wanted that thing but because somebody else wanted it
[Amit Varma]: and he coined the term mimetic desire mimetic of course you know coming from imitation the
[Amit Varma]: idea being that you want something not because it's intrinsic to you but somebody else wants
[Amit Varma]: it and you know it could be a yuppie wanting to buy the latest Mercedes or it could be
[Amit Varma]: a young person wanting to get married and settle down because hey that's what everyone
[Amit Varma]: does and that's what is expected so you're like I want that too but you don't ever examine
[Amit Varma]: it or think about it deeply and the framework that I got from Burgess's book which I find
[Amit Varma]: really useful is of thick and thin desires where thick desires are intrinsic to you you
[Amit Varma]: know they are deep they are what you really desire they come from within you right and
[Amit Varma]: when we talk of thick and thin obviously it's understood that all the creature necessities
[Amit Varma]: like you know food shelter all that is not in this everybody wants that that's okay that's
[Amit Varma]: understood but otherwise you have thick desires for the things that you really really want
[Amit Varma]: and you have thin desires which are things that you want because of different factors
[Amit Varma]: in the environment maybe somebody else wants it maybe it'll get you the approval of others
[Amit Varma]: so on and so forth and the problem is that thin desires can often be intense so the thing
[Amit Varma]: that you want the most right now you know is probably not the thing that you really
[Amit Varma]: want the most that comes from inside you may want it very badly for example the quest for
[Amit Varma]: validation which can lead so many people to do the things they do on Twitter we'll talk
[Amit Varma]: about that also and so on or when you speak about writers you know you spoke about how
[Amit Varma]: some writers are you know more in love with the idea of being writers I want to get something
[Amit Varma]: published I want to be nominated for an award rather than loving the act of writing itself
[Amit Varma]: which is on the printed page and I imagine loving the act of writing itself you know
[Amit Varma]: would be a thick desire because it can only really come from within where you enjoy what
[Amit Varma]: you're creating and the stories that you're telling whereas wanting to be a writer could
[Amit Varma]: be a sort of a thin desire and this is caused me to sort of reflect on why do I want the
[Amit Varma]: things that I want you know what are my thick and thin desires in a sense and I'd encourage
[Amit Varma]: all listeners to also kind of think about this in their own context but in your context
[Amit Varma]: then looking back what would you say would be your thick desires and what would you say
[Amit Varma]: would be the things that you wanted but now you feel bad that you wanted them that you
[Amit Varma]: should not have wanted those kind of directions you went down on I think I love the way you
[Guest]: come at questions because you're asking us by and large during the podcast to tap into
[Guest]: something that is deeper than just the automatic list of the 10 books that influenced you or
[Guest]: what made you want to be a writer or whatever and I think my deepest desires were for a
[Guest]: combination of privacy and experience and immersion particularly into the world of stories
[Guest]: one of the thick desires that I didn't act on for many years because I was terrified
[Guest]: of actually making it happen was that was writing I came to writing very late I don't
[Guest]: mean that I came to writing late actually I've been writing for a living from the time
[Guest]: I was about 19 or 20 I think I wrote my first book review when I was 15 years old or something
[Guest]: of the sort obnoxious in that sense we Bengalis what can I say but I was working at the business
[Guest]: standard by the time I was 19 years old 1920 yeah and I was with them for about 15 years
[Guest]: or so I didn't really know how to want a career a lot of people asked me for advice on their
[Guest]: writing career and I am blank about that I knew that I was curious about many many things
[Guest]: I think my one of my deepest desires was just to both experience the world in every form
[Guest]: so I was a travel writer I was a food writer for a while I was on the gender beat with
[Guest]: the New York Times and I see that as just an urge to in this human lifetime in this
[Guest]: human form reach out for as much of the world as possible that was far more important to
[Guest]: me than material wealth status and all of that which in just as well I chose writing
[Guest]: as a profession in that sense I will say in parenthesis that while writing hasn't made
[Guest]: me you know ridiculously wealthy it's surprising that it doesn't make you that poor either
[Guest]: it's it's possible to make a living doing something that you love which is one of the
[Guest]: first things that we believe is not true you know a thick desire again just solitary exploration
[Guest]: as a young girl in Delhi I think I'm militated against the fact that at a certain hour of
[Guest]: the evening the city becomes a men's city and you can't walk safely as a woman and I
[Guest]: was very diffident but also insistent that I should walk everywhere that I should you
[Guest]: only see a city or know a city really whether it's London or Delhi or Calcutta or Bombay
[Guest]: it's only on foot that you really get the pulse of it the beat of it the sense of it
[Guest]: outside of your own neighborhoods right and there you have it you know a question I think
[Guest]: for me being in movement creating not for a prize and not for a book contract but just
[Guest]: the work ultimately it keeps coming back in the writing to me and the page I like people
[Guest]: to be able to read through whatever I'm writing very swiftly but I also like the work that
[Guest]: goes into making that read a swift read I like them to walk away whether I'm writing
[Guest]: about cats or humans with the feeling that they have been in a real world and a world
[Guest]: that is maybe a little more intense and more real than the world that surrounds you again
[Guest]: I have a habit of segwaying and traveling very far from the question that you asked
[Guest]: but I was very fortunate when I was in my 20s in my first job again at the Business
[Guest]: Standard and then later as a young editor at Penguin to meet a lot of writers and artists
[Guest]: in Delhi at a time before success had in that sense touched and transformed both the art
[Guest]: world and the literary world so MF Hussain at that point of time had his own right painting
[Guest]: studio he was already becoming the big financial success that he was but for most other painters
[Guest]: there wasn't that much money on the table per se that didn't lead to a life of great
[Guest]: purity it just meant that there was a freedom in the way that they were writing there were
[Guest]: a handful of galleries that were exhibiting their work and so it was for writers you know
[Guest]: for Amitav Ghosh sitting in a Barsati in defense colony writing his first books and shaving
[Guest]: off half his hair as incentive to keep him indoors writing and not outdoors distracted
[Guest]: or for Shahid Agha Shahid Ali you know coming out with his poems in which he puts pain and
[Guest]: love and a sense of foreboding because I think Shahid was one of those people who saw many
[Guest]: many years ago the future to which Kashmir was inexorably moving I don't think he had
[Guest]: any defenses against the truth but with all of these writers I spent a lot of my time
[Guest]: in writer student studios you know in Gari village with meeting ceramic artists like
[Guest]: Joy Michael and Gina Franklin Gupta and a huge suite of people and every now and then
[Guest]: business standard would push me out and make me interview fashion designers which is how
[Guest]: I came to accidentally dance in Milan Soman's direction while I was still wearing a khadi
[Guest]: kurta from Khadi Gramodiyag Bhavan. Is this on tape? Have you danced? Thank God! No! What
[Guest]: was this? It was a fashion show it was an early fashion show where Rohit Bal was just
[Guest]: and Tarun Tehriani were just about breaking through and there was so much snobbery and
[Guest]: deadly you know the initial reaction to this generation of fashion geniuses from Rohit
[Guest]: Bal and Tarun Tehriani to Reena Dhaka and the rest was Hai unke beta toh darzi ban gaya
[Guest]: you know that boy has gone and become a tailor and then of course liberalization happened
[Guest]: India hit the stratosphere but this was just a little before that he took the first few
[Guest]: fashion shows with the proper catwalk and a ramp and stuff and I was sent off to cover
[Guest]: this and I bought a dress specifically for this I remember this because at that time
[Guest]: Delhi didn't have much in the way of places where you could buy fancy clothes and I went
[Guest]: off and bought a dress which in retrospect was a horror I remember very little about
[Guest]: it except that I'm sure there were frills involved and puff sleeves or padded sleeves
[Guest]: padded sleeves yeah the 80s power woman padded sleeve which had lasted into the early 90s
[Guest]: let's draw a merciful vein over this memory but I wasn't able to get back home from the
[Guest]: office in time so I went off to this fashion show in what I was wearing which happened
[Guest]: to be a khadi kurta which is not what you wear to a fashion show then or now but you
[Guest]: know bless them they were very warm and inviting and suddenly the music starts up and I'm on
[Guest]: the catwalk I mean I was at the side of the catwalk but the catwalk was basically a red
[Guest]: carpet on the ground and the music was contagious that was a less formal time and all of us
[Guest]: started dancing and I turn around and there's this sweet guy with a lot of muscles who's
[Guest]: quite good-looking and he dances a little bit in my direction I'm like okay you know
[Guest]: he's a good dancer yeah he has the beat whatever and then I asked somebody who's he and they
[Guest]: say Minin Soman yeah he's a supermodel already at that time one little brush with fame Delhi
[Guest]: in that time was a lot of fun though but it was fun also because it was informal it was
[Guest]: the kind of place where the writer Alan Sene used to play guitar at this little place called
[Guest]: The Cellar which was one of the two or three places that you could go to for entertainment
[Guest]: the first discos had started up Gungroo and my kind of place and I guess we led this kind
[Guest]: of double life you know we were not most of us didn't have much pocket money you didn't
[Guest]: have the chance to really work at jobs and stuff but if you could afford the entrance
[Guest]: fee for Gungroo then you could dance the night away discos didn't shut down till about six
[Guest]: in the morning if ever you know so you'd finish that and go to the clarages and everybody
[Guest]: there'd be about eight people sitting there ordering one pot of coffee and bless their
[Guest]: hearts they let us do that they were kind about that but getting back to the writers
[Guest]: and the artists in their studio I think the three things I learned from them is the work
[Guest]: itself is often messy and the opposite of joyful and you will be cursing as you do your
[Guest]: first drafts or your early sketches or whatever but there is a joy to the work itself does
[Guest]: that make sense everybody and some of the writers were drunks by their second profession
[Guest]: you know a lot of the artists were happening into a range of other vices and pursuits and
[Guest]: parties and this that and the other but the one thing that they all did was they showed
[Guest]: up if you were serious about being a writer or an artist you owed it to yourself and to
[Guest]: the work more than anything else not to the craft you know not to your vocation or reputation
[Guest]: or yes sir but to the work itself to just show up day after day and the third thing
[Guest]: was take some joy in what you're making you know don't try to write like somebody else
[Guest]: Vikram Seth didn't get to write a suitable boy by trying to imitate a Steinbeck or somebody
[Guest]: else if you see what I mean Arundhati Roy didn't find her voice by trying to be somebody
[Guest]: other than she was I think that was the biggest thing that I started to pick up as well tell
[Guest]: your own stories that generation was not focused on success very much the next generation has
[Guest]: learned how to negotiate the world of celebrity television and what to do on a lit fest stage
[Guest]: and all of that and I think when all of that is fun it's sometimes the part of lit fest
[Guest]: that is great is really getting to meet readers for me and the other part of it it's wise
[Guest]: to think of it as dress up you know you get to play dress up and go out but maybe not
[Guest]: take it too seriously I think over the course of a lifetime I've also seen how a lot of
[Guest]: writers can stop writing after having done some great work this one whom I don't want
[Guest]: to name but you know whose books have got weaker and weaker as their public life has
[Guest]: become more and more important and you sense at some point that the writer lives in the
[Guest]: shadow of the books and that the public appearances this whole thing about speaking in public
[Guest]: and being important and even the good stuff of supporting this cause or that cause the
[Guest]: truth of it is that most of writing doesn't even happen on the page it happens in a pact
[Guest]: of silence and unless you give the I think this is something we've been moving towards
[Guest]: from the start of the conversation it's a question of where do you find rich ground
[Guest]: and it is true that many of us come to these places from a lot of privilege but I will
[Guest]: also say that wealth and comfort are not the pathways to writing I mean just a simple observation
[Guest]: that many people have made before me if that was true then the rich would be writers right
[Guest]: and the rich aren't really and the reason that they aren't is because actually writing
[Guest]: actually creating something and then having the patience to go back and revise we all
[Guest]: fall in love with the first things that tumble out of our mouths and all of that the fact
[Guest]: is that most bits of writing are not much good unless there's some revision or some
[Guest]: craft to it and I find that either the craft comes in before a lot of people do the outlining
[Guest]: and the plotting and all of that even if they're just holding it in their magnificent heads
[Guest]: or it comes in after but it's very rare for writing not to have craft even at the popular
[Guest]: end of the scale and popular is not to be sneered at but someone like Stephen King someone
[Guest]: like Daniel Steele someone like Chetan Bhagat they work really hard at the craft of getting
[Guest]: people to continue to read and identify and feel something you see what I mean all these
[Guest]: years anyway I should again hand it back to you because I'm about to deliver a lecture
[Amit Varma]: on a craft.
[Amit Varma]: It's also fascinating there are so many strands I want to kind of pull at till they unravel
[Amit Varma]: completely and the padded shoulder dissolves can you elaborate a bit on what you said about
[Amit Varma]: most of writing not happening on the page?
[Guest]: I think so much happens particularly with a novel but this is true also of short stories
[Guest]: and possibly every form of writing except for the poem poems can happen to you as you
[Guest]: know a lot of poets report the experience of feeling the poem more or less take you
[Guest]: by your collar and just run through you and all you have to do is to write it down and
[Guest]: then continue to revise or whatever.
[Guest]: In every other form of writing inspiration is important essential all of that but if
[Guest]: you've been working in the field of writing whether you're doing screenplays or whatever
[Guest]: you know actually that idea generation is the least of it.
[Guest]: In between books I struggle for a while because I have no lack of ideas it's the opposite
[Guest]: I have an idea a minute you know there's exercise books filled with ideas for short stories
[Guest]: ranging from the risible to the hmm this might work but you only have so much time right
[Guest]: and the imagination is the thing that we tend to skip over when we are talking about writing
[Guest]: a lot of discussions particularly American influence discussions go immediately to craft
[Guest]: to style to plot to voice all of that those are not unimportant but I think you know what
[Guest]: you're doing with your course as well is training people to the idea of the practice itself
[Guest]: and what is that practice it's just a way of turning on the headlights of the imagination
[Guest]: and turning on the terrain and that old classic question where do ideas come from Neil Gaiman
[Guest]: used to say there's a little shop down the road and you know a man across the counter
[Guest]: hands me my ideas every morning in a nice paper bag or something to that extent the
[Guest]: truth is we don't know we don't know Elizabeth Gilbert again the author of Eat Pray Love
[Guest]: she's talked about the surreal but very real and very commonplace experience of having
[Guest]: an idea for a book that you haven't worked on and you let it go and four years later
[Guest]: somebody else comes up with that book in total and the first time it happens it's eerie it's
[Guest]: not plagiarism but it feels like a theft from your unconscious until you realize that you're
[Guest]: in spooky territory out here you are part of the collective unconscious of course there's
[Guest]: a possibility that maybe the idea wasn't that precious after all some years back when I
[Guest]: was just about starting out on the notes that became Black River and I knew I wanted to
[Guest]: do a thriller I knew I wanted it set in Delhi I knew that it wasn't going to be about people
[Guest]: like me and so it would require some research I knew that the river played a large part
[Guest]: in it and I knew that it was about heartbreak and grief and I knew nothing else and this
[Guest]: idea skated around my head why don't you write about Sheherazade instead you know bring her
[Guest]: into our contemporary times and what would she be now with the weight of everything that
[Guest]: she's experienced and gone through she becomes this man's bride after seeing so many women
[Guest]: killed you know literally a bed of blood and then she ends up married to this murderer
[Guest]: you know for the rest of her life she wins her life back but the price of that seems
[Guest]: pretty high maybe she's a drug addict and I never wrote that story because the truth
[Guest]: of it is that Sheherazade's I do believe that we should be free to write with no limits
[Guest]: on the imagination but I bump up against the difficulty of translating Sheherazade into
[Guest]: my times there's just too much about her background her Middle Eastern life that I would not know
[Guest]: or be comfortable with I tabled it many years later I read a book by another writer and
[Guest]: beautifully done book where there's Sheherazade in modern times and she's an addict of sorts
[Guest]: and I don't think anyone's stealing from anyone else it's just that that realm is mysterious
[Guest]: but it's accessible to all if you train yourself and if you train the muscles of the imagination
[Guest]: which are as real if you like as the muscles of a runner yeah so that's part of what happens
[Guest]: off the page is learning to quieten down because nothing happens in the noise even the writers
[Guest]: who go out you know in the middle of the hurdy-burdy of life the bars of Paris the slums of Bombay
[Guest]: the permit rooms and all of that at some point you're gonna have to come back to quietness
[Guest]: that's where it all starts that's the fertile ground at least you're gonna have to quiet
[Guest]: down enough to hear the voices of the people that you're writing about right and then comes
[Guest]: the shaping you know that can happen off the page in a very technical sense as in you might
[Guest]: be doing your notes and outlines and all the crafty things that you do but I think some
[Guest]: of that really happens when you're living in the classic two worlds you're not you're
[Guest]: walking around you're talking to your partner and your friends you're going shopping and
[Guest]: all of that but part of you really at that point of time truly is living somewhere else
[Guest]: you know that's one reason why I find short stories which I don't know how to write but
[Guest]: which I'm trying to learn how to write a little easier because you can't quite pop in and
[Guest]: out it's just as intense but you don't have to spend years in that world right when I
[Guest]: say most of the writing happens off the page there's another thing as well which is simply
[Guest]: that everything you were before you turn to writing is also what you're bringing to the
[Guest]: table right a lot of people want to be writers really young and I find myself not wanting
[Guest]: to be discouraging but just wanting to say would you like to go and live a little you
[Guest]: know don't the MFA by itself is a fine thing but try not to build a life maybe that's MFA
[Guest]: and writing residencies and those slightly enclosed worlds if that makes sense that makes
[Amit Varma]: a lot of sense and that's and that's something I found about myself when I was young also
[Amit Varma]: that I wanted to write but I didn't have enough lived experience to be able to write meaningfully
[Amit Varma]: about anything and then you went off and became a poker Marvin and all of that and then I
[Amit Varma]: came back and now I have the lived experience but I don't have the discipline perhaps you
[Amit Varma]: know it's ironic one of the one of the four webinars for my writing courses about process
[Amit Varma]: and discipline and all of that and I feel so embarrassed because I'm just all of them
[Amit Varma]: must be all my participants must be staggering as I listen to this but that I myself haven't
[Amit Varma]: been able to put so much of that into practice though I place a certain stress on it because
[Amit Varma]: partly because I know that that is the important thing that you actually have to you know sit
[Amit Varma]: down and get the writing done and build those processes because ideas like you said are
[Amit Varma]: just a dime a dozen but you know learning how to tell the stories and telling them and
[Amit Varma]: that kind of also matters you know another thread from what you mentioned earlier and
[Amit Varma]: that I want to kind of tug at I don't this is not a good metaphor not tugging at threads
[Amit Varma]: is something that you've sort of written in your book again about when you were young
[Amit Varma]: about the thrill of discovery where when you're describing yourself as a kid you are always
[Amit Varma]: going up to strangers apparently jumping on their knees and demanding that they tell you
[Amit Varma]: a story and this gets very irritating after the point but then you write quote I must
[Amit Varma]: have been three when I realized that books contain stories the way tins contain biscuits
[Amit Varma]: and from the time that I made that connection my mind was not at peace so much of childhood
[Amit Varma]: is a balancing act between the first indelible rush of astonishment and discovery and the
[Amit Varma]: inevitable grappling with frustration when he was three my young nephew named the shiny
[Amit Varma]: thing in the sky a star using the word importantly and I could see the satisfaction in his eyes
[Amit Varma]: the glory of naming everything in the world for the very first time ever as though no
[Amit Varma]: human being had done this before him and no one would do this again those first thrills
[Amit Varma]: of discovery are fierce and unforgettable stop quote and and of course your first discovery
[Amit Varma]: of frustration was that you couldn't reach out and read these books and all that and
[Amit Varma]: you've described so beautifully about how you first kind of read and you open pull this
[Amit Varma]: book down you opened it and the letters were black ants and then suddenly some of those
[Amit Varma]: black ants made sense to you and the first words that you remember reading therefore
[Amit Varma]: are quote slowly silently now the moon walks the night in her tender shoes it was magic
[Guest]: it was magic it I think some of us never forget that first moment of magic you know when you
[Guest]: make the connection and whatever the thing is for some people it's cricket for some people
[Guest]: it's music you know picking up their first guitar we're sitting here in a space surrounded
[Guest]: by guitars and for me it was right it was not writing it was just understanding that
[Guest]: all of that bewildering you know hieroglyphics the things that didn't make sense were things
[Guest]: that are deeply deeply coveted and I love that so much that I famously ate a page of
[Amit Varma]: the book you ate which is why your book is called the girl who ate books because you
[Amit Varma]: thought to yourself if this reads so nice how well would it taste but it didn't taste
[Amit Varma]: that great but it was very satisfying so my question from here is there's a sort of twofold
[Amit Varma]: question and one of them is this that you have this introduction therefore into the
[Amit Varma]: world of the imagination and storytelling and that's incredibly important like reading
[Amit Varma]: is I take reading so seriously because we have our one life to live but when through
[Amit Varma]: books you can live the lives of so many others you know through by getting inside the heads
[Amit Varma]: and sort of experiencing everything that they do and and some people read and some people
[Amit Varma]: don't like I'd written a column a political column but it was about reading a few years
[Amit Varma]: back based on a story that a friend of Narendra Modi told me about him and her story really
[Amit Varma]: was that she used to work with him in the auties in Gujarat and she was at a gathering
[Amit Varma]: at his house a gathering of friends a personal gathering seven or eight people and at one
[Amit Varma]: point Mr. Modi started telling this story about how his mother had fever one day and
[Amit Varma]: she was ill and she was feeling very very hot and he went to turn on the fan and there
[Amit Varma]: was no electricity and as he told the story he started crying right and my friend's point
[Amit Varma]: was that Modi is an experiential leader in the sense that he understands the world only
[Amit Varma]: through experience so therefore he has felt viscerally what electricity can mean so when
[Amit Varma]: he is chief minister of Gujarat he's saying power to every village and he genuinely means
[Amit Varma]: it or he has walked on roads and he understands the importance so he says build roads right
[Amit Varma]: but there are some things that you cannot experience like the lives of others or like
[Amit Varma]: maybe counterintuitive economic concepts like spontaneous order the positive sumness of
[Amit Varma]: things and so on and so forth and when you're running a country and you cannot experience
[Amit Varma]: you know all this knowledge is close to you it becomes an issue now the thing is he was
[Amit Varma]: not born to privilege so it is understandable that he wasn't a reader and that he didn't
[Amit Varma]: have you know books around him and all that but what one would then expect is that either
[Amit Varma]: you you know begin reading whenever you can because you know you you form your picture
[Amit Varma]: of the world by joining dots where do you get those dots it's mainly from reading honestly
[Amit Varma]: so that's the importance of reading and even if that was not the case then rely on experts
[Amit Varma]: who can cover the areas that you don't know so one I felt that reading is incredibly important
[Amit Varma]: for this reason and those who shut themselves off to it are hobbling themselves and crippling
[Amit Varma]: themselves in a way you know they are not allowing the best version of themselves to
[Amit Varma]: ever arise in fact they're guaranteeing that a very suboptimal version of themselves is
[Amit Varma]: who they will be all their lives and the other dimension across which this runs is goes back
[Amit Varma]: to that question of thick desires and thin desires that the reason you know you and I
[Amit Varma]: have the thick desires that we do is partly to do with because we have read so much because
[Amit Varma]: our interior lives are richer for that but they have all these layers to them and a lot
[Amit Varma]: of it comes from reading or a life of the imagination and so on and many people in this
[Amit Varma]: desperately poor country and most of it is still desperately poor don't have that privilege
[Amit Varma]: that they can read books or they have access to books and all of that and they are shut
[Amit Varma]: off from this and I wonder how that affects you know those things like what people even
[Amit Varma]: want what people even desire and all of that so I am rambling a little bit but just thinking
[Amit Varma]: aloud about reading because if I say that you know it sounds extremely snobbish and
[Amit Varma]: elitist to say that readers are a particular kind of people and non-readers are other kind
[Amit Varma]: of people and you know but is this something that you think about that you and I have had
[Amit Varma]: the good fortune to have been readers to whatever extent we have I've read much less than you
[Amit Varma]: of course but a lot of people don't read and this has implications not just for those people
[Amit Varma]: themselves but also for our society for our culture for our democracy for everything okay
[Guest]: I'm going to I think we're getting to the core of what a reading life or a non-reading
[Guest]: life is about so I'm going to deal with this in sections one is the points you raised about
[Guest]: Mr. Modi I'm not at all sure by the way that he's not a reader he certainly is a writer
[Guest]: and he's written poems for a very long period of time he's articulate and I think I remember
[Guest]: from his time as Gujarat CM along with the rest of his legacy and the history of the
[Guest]: riots and the engineering of those riots but one of the things that happened in the aftermath
[Guest]: of the Gujarat riots when his rehabilitation was in progress was people saying but you
[Guest]: know he does read he does he reads reports he reads this that and the other what we're
[Guest]: speaking about here is something slightly different which is the mistaking of deep emotion
[Guest]: for empathy just because a leader any leader can feel with intensity and truthfulness perhaps
[Guest]: on a certain subject to feel very deeply about the plight of one section of people does not
[Guest]: mean that he or she has the empathy to extend their imagination towards the goodwill and
[Guest]: the well-being of everybody else in the country particularly people who are not like them
[Guest]: or people who identified as the other the enemy the necessary you know person community
[Guest]: against whom you pit a certain thing we don't teach political empathy and though we talk
[Guest]: a lot about be kind be caring one of the reasons why writers like George Saunders or why Barack
[Guest]: Obama to a certain extent in his American presidency prize something like reaching out
[Guest]: and compassion is because all of these skills they interconnected and not the same compassion
[Guest]: empathy kindness these are not easy things to practice particularly in leadership the
[Guest]: second thing that you've touched on again with regard to Mr. Modi why doesn't he then
[Guest]: pull in people who do read and who are experts on the economy or areas where the Indian project
[Guest]: has palpably run into trouble if you had experts on demonetization for example you could have
[Amit Varma]: spared the country a great deal of pain if you did consult experts and they told him
[Guest]: not to do it Raghuram Rajan famously yeah but then you know that intolerance of an opinion
[Guest]: that comes from people who are not exactly like you or have not had your background in
[Guest]: the RSS that's that's a parallel problem that is a political issue let's get back to reading
[Guest]: per se I think often the claims that we make for reading a very very large because we see
[Guest]: the value of it okay but as a lifelong reader I've sometimes asked myself aside from the
[Guest]: sheer delight of it what use is this per se everything that you say about reading I'm
[Guest]: just being devil's advocate out here you can learn as much from YouTube videos okay or
[Guest]: you can learn from podcasts you don't have to be a reader in order to learn skills okay
[Guest]: what we found in books is to be honest about it deep and abiding delight and we've also
[Guest]: found an infinitude you know of possibilities you know how many books I wrote a column about
[Guest]: this for the FT which is how I know these figures I'm not just you know making them
[Guest]: up but the maximum number of books that most readers are going to be able to read in a
[Guest]: lifetime is 5,000 and that's if they are obsessive readers who read more than about 80 books
[Guest]: a year and I remember when I came across that number I had a moment of pure panic that I
[Guest]: never feel this about humans I never feel like how is how am I going to go through life
[Guest]: not making all the friends I possibly could make you know but I do feel it about books
[Guest]: that hunger and what I prize about books particularly is that they're one of the clearest not the
[Guest]: only but they're one of the clearest windows we have to connecting with past minds everything
[Guest]: else that you can learn from whether we just mentioned you know YouTube videos podcasts
[Guest]: sound basically and film all of that is in by and large in the present you see so reading
[Guest]: is the one thing that is so out of time music is one of the others dance is one of the others
[Guest]: art yes but as an instrument for learning reading is out of time and reading challenges
[Guest]: you perpetually because it keeps inviting you to inhabit other points of view not just
[Guest]: listen to you know as important as that listening is it doesn't always come with identification
[Guest]: when you're reading a book particularly a physical book I have nothing against reading
[Guest]: audiobooks but there is a caveat to that if you're reading in a distracted space you're
[Guest]: not going to be able to retain that much of the book and with an audiobook or with the
[Guest]: Kindle your reading experience is often incredibly enjoyable but there's a spatial problem a
[Guest]: geographical problem if you like I find that with reading on the Kindle or in audiobooks
[Guest]: I never know where I am in the book does that make sense where is the physical book you
[Guest]: was moving through it and you can tell whether you're at the beginning the middle or the
[Guest]: end and that has an impact on the way you remember certain things from the book I do
[Guest]: think that we overestimate the virtue of reading and maybe underestimate the fact that most
[Guest]: of us are readers because it is sheer delight sometimes challenging sometimes unpleasant
[Guest]: I just spent some time reading memoirs by a woman Shabitri Devi who was part of the
[Guest]: right wing had a book blurb by Savarkar and believed firmly not just in the virtue of
[Guest]: the Nazis but she believed that Hitler was alive that Jews and other people should be
[Guest]: put to the sword you know and there was something cold-blooded about reading that and I think
[Guest]: for a while after that I found myself you know as with Mein Kampf unable to read for
[Guest]: a short while actually read for a short while because you're encountering thoughts of pure
[Guest]: evil and inhumanity let's put it that way that's on label it as evil as such the thing
[Guest]: that you asked about the inequality in reading in this country we've always had public libraries
[Guest]: but not on a grand scale not like America what we've had is the one-room library you
[Guest]: know that's how my father who grew up in the town of Cuttack in Orissa he and his brothers
[Guest]: had a book hunger ignited in them in part by the fact that there were very few bookshops
[Guest]: and that their access to books was so limited in a way as an adult I found that you know
[Guest]: though my mother's family was surrounded by books growing up in Calcutta and all of that
[Guest]: it was my father who bought books to the point where he sometimes you know drove my mother
[Guest]: mad by taking the grocery money and coming back instead of with dal and rice and stuff
[Guest]: like that he'd come back with figs and chocolates and time-life encyclopedias and a host of
[Guest]: you know everything from Shoru Chandru to Tolkien to Toni Morrison to Garcia Marquez
[Guest]: in fact a lot of my reading habits were influenced by him because he didn't believe in denying
[Guest]: any of his children access to books you know he believed that if you picked up a book it
[Guest]: was up to you to decide whether it was at your level or not and that was one of the
[Guest]: biggest freedoms that reading gave me there was no censorship to reading you see in everything
[Guest]: else particularly when you live in a country like India which has been working towards
[Guest]: defining itself as a democracy but has never been as radically individualistic a society
[Guest]: as America or parts of Europe and never defined itself by the freedoms of the individuals
[Guest]: you know even if in its most politically free periods I don't think the freedom of the individual
[Guest]: has been books are one space where you can be whatever you know you can reach for whatever
[Guest]: you can be challenged outraged disgusted you can hate what you're reading you can love
[Guest]: with your reading you can identify with it or not but it is a completely free space instead
[Guest]: of that what we had was first the radio revolution then we had TV and then we had you know today's
[Guest]: social media revolution which is to some extent also engineered for heat or for very very
[Guest]: intense short compelling stories of a certain kind right what we didn't invest in as a country
[Guest]: was the infrastructure that people take for granted elsewhere the infrastructure of libraries
[Guest]: and bookshops and all of that you know and without that investment it's not just being
[Guest]: able to afford books I grew up in Calcutta in part and it was very democratic city where
[Guest]: reading was concerned it wasn't a question of whether people could afford books they
[Guest]: made space in their budgets at practically every level except for the most abjectly poor
[Guest]: if you were had any kind of income you would be buying books and magazines and you know
[Guest]: they were cheap and you had an equality a kind of democracy as a reader you could be
[Guest]: a guy on a bus sitting there reading you know Murasaki in translation and you could be sitting
[Guest]: in your fancy Baliganj a red brick bungalow reading Murasaki and there'd be no difference
[Guest]: between the two of you you know you both had an equally valid opinion does that make sense
[Guest]: so I've often felt that we've not responded adequately to the book hunger of this country
[Guest]: and that part of that is this emphasis not by you but in a lot of ways you know people
[Guest]: train people to read useful things even if you're not reading textbooks but what you
[Guest]: read should be informative in some way or educational or make you money right and if
[Guest]: there's a reading revolution I'd like to usher in in this country it's not just the whole
[Guest]: thing of more bookshops and more places to read more bookshops and let me say this I
[Guest]: believe our booksellers do a wonderful job but I would also like to see bookshops and
[Guest]: libraries that are beautiful and set up in all kinds of parts of the city not just in
[Guest]: the affluent side of the city not just in malls you know they really should be much
[Guest]: more accessible one place where we feel I'd like to see books in the hands of everybody
[Guest]: because one of the things that I used to do was to work on library recommendations for
[Guest]: companies that stocked libraries around Gurgaon and you know these were early versions of
[Guest]: the community library that Mirdala Koshi and Michael and others run so well and these to
[Guest]: sponsor specific schools and there was a point where you're stocking the library but you're
[Guest]: also giving out a few of those NBT books you know the little very well-made ones or Pratham's
[Guest]: books and you're making sure that every child has two or three books and one of the kids
[Guest]: he was about five six years old you know just about in school he sits there and he just
[Guest]: cuts off from all of us and he's just sitting there with his book and he's reading it and
[Guest]: he's on each page and slowly but surely he gets to the book and then he reads it again
[Guest]: and then very reluctantly he hands it back to the team member who'd given it to him and
[Guest]: he said no no this is your book you know and he was like okay so he starts reading it again
[Guest]: and then he tries to hand it back and then somebody realized said no this is your book
[Guest]: to keep not just in school but you take it home and he was just very silent for a second
[Guest]: you know he didn't say anything it was he asked several times do I get to keep this
[Guest]: after a while I turned around and I see him standing there in the corridor and he's hugging
[Guest]: the book to himself and he was crying because he said no one's ever given him a book before
[Guest]: you know and that was how precious it was and I think from that time onwards I don't
[Guest]: work in the NGO sector but if there's one thing that you get passionate about it's about
[Guest]: donating books to libraries and I really respect the people who are working at community libraries
[Guest]: because it's not just about handing the books out and then walking away you have to help
[Guest]: people find the books that they're going to love you know and I think that whole thing
[Guest]: you know the understanding that there's a dormant book love in the country that often
[Guest]: doesn't come to light because there's no way to feed that book hunger the question I ask
[Guest]: is really what are we depriving people of sometimes just casual pleasure you know just
[Guest]: the pleasure of reading Surinder Pathak's spy stories or Ibn-e-Safi's Jasusi Duniya
[Guest]: stories or something of the sort sometimes it's somebody who might find practical advice
[Guest]: in a book or learn about something that later becomes a career there's so many different
[Guest]: levels at which books work you know and I wish some of the money that's going into the
[Guest]: current horse trading of politicians you know the cross exchanging hands in order to topple
[Guest]: the state governments I wish some of that was just put towards putting a book into people's
[Amit Varma]: hands it would make such a difference that's that's such a lovely story I'll respond to
[Amit Varma]: three of the or rather I'll respond to what you said with three points and the first one
[Amit Varma]: is like you know at one level of course it's true that you don't need to rely on books
[Amit Varma]: alone for knowledge you have YouTube videos you have podcasts you have all of that but
[Amit Varma]: there is something books do give you which none of the others do and and again this goes
[Amit Varma]: to you know books that are not instrumental that if you want to learn something then you
[Amit Varma]: read the book and you get that knowledge from there but I think fiction gives you this deeper
[Amit Varma]: world of the imagination which I feel that sometimes we can take for granted even in
[Amit Varma]: ourselves it's like the seen and the unseen right it's unseen there is this story of and
[Amit Varma]: I'll probably say it wrong but it's a story about daddy fish and baby fish are swimming
[Amit Varma]: in the water and uncle fish passes by and he asks daddy fish how's the water today and
[Amit Varma]: daddy fish says great and then uncle fish goes on and then baby fish turns to daddy
[Amit Varma]: fish and asks what's water you know and I think we kind of take it for granted at that
[Amit Varma]: level and and not just that we and I've realized this about myself and I realized that I have
[Amit Varma]: to stop doing this that I assume that if there is a certain bedrock of experiences that have
[Amit Varma]: shaped me or certain cultural influences that I now take for granted that are like water
[Amit Varma]: to me I assume that others share it as well but others are not everybody is swimming in
[Amit Varma]: different water you know one of the reasons I like to go into the childhoods of people
[Amit Varma]: of my vintage or earlier in the show so much is that 60 to 70 percent of our country is
[Amit Varma]: born after liberalization you know that shared experience is not there of there being a waiting
[Amit Varma]: list if you want to buy a phone of so few cars on the street as it were and all of those
[Amit Varma]: things you know and I think books give you an entry into all of these worlds and they
[Amit Varma]: are immersive the word you used earlier and that's not something that YouTube videos or
[Amit Varma]: even podcasts such as mine will you know necessarily give people the other point almost a counterpoint
[Amit Varma]: to this that I want to make is that I actually tell people that listening to audio books
[Amit Varma]: is great because I think a mistake people sometimes make is that they think it's an
[Amit Varma]: either or that printed books and audio books compete with each other but as I discussed
[Amit Varma]: earlier thus the same use cases I mentioned for podcasts they apply for audio books as
[Amit Varma]: well not everyone has a privilege to sit down and take one hour every day when they are
[Amit Varma]: reading people live busy lives people have other kinds of responsibilities and things
[Amit Varma]: to look after but there will always be times where they can do passive listening so again
[Amit Varma]: my advice to people who do my course or people who might be listening to this is that even
[Amit Varma]: if you don't have the time to sit down and read a physical book it's okay to listen because
[Amit Varma]: you're still getting that world of the imagination you're still listening to those sentences
[Amit Varma]: and listening to the language and through osmosis a lot of it kind of sort of filters
[Amit Varma]: down and the third thing I agree with you on and this is something that I sort of make
[Amit Varma]: it a point to drive home again to people who do my course is that when you're reading read
[Amit Varma]: indiscriminately read everything you know we've built this hierarchies of reading that
[Amit Varma]: Gabrielle Garcia Marquez is cool Chetan Bhagat is not cool and that just makes me so angry
[Amit Varma]: because the point is that you know like you said our time in this world is limited in
[Amit Varma]: terms of what we can read right you mentioned 5,000 books for most of us who are a certain
[Amit Varma]: age is even less than that you know and you want to spend that time reading things that
[Amit Varma]: you enjoy reading so for me you know my metric for whether I read something is one if I'm
[Amit Varma]: enjoying it if I'm like there's a thrilling story happening you know Jasusi Duniya or
[Amit Varma]: whatever then that's a great reason to keep reading or if you want a certain kind of knowledge
[Amit Varma]: in a book but it's hard work but you want the knowledge it'll bring value to your life
[Amit Varma]: that's a good reason to keep reading but a bad reason to keep reading is because people
[Amit Varma]: say oh this book is in the canon or is one so and so prize and you have that fear of
[Amit Varma]: missing out and then you kind of go through that and then the sunk cost fallacy kicks
[Amit Varma]: in I've already read a hundred pages and all of that so there again I couldn't agree with
[Amit Varma]: you more my advice to everyone would be that do not spend time reading books you don't
[Amit Varma]: enjoy reading just read anything that you're you know having fun reading or that you feel
[Amit Varma]: adds value to you you know there is no such thing as a guilty pleasure when it comes to
[Amit Varma]: books and we'll go into a break now after which we'll come back and go take you back
[Amit Varma]: to your childhood from when you were three years old but before that you mentioned how
[Amit Varma]: your you know dad used to come back with all kinds of odd things when he was sent shopping
[Amit Varma]: so before the break I want to read out this lovely paragraph from your book where you
[Amit Varma]: write quote my mother and this is after your father's come back from shopping your mother's
[Amit Varma]: given him a list he's come back with things and you write quote my mother inspected the
[Amit Varma]: dining table and found chocolate cake figs and Gabriel Garcia Marquez in paperback but
[Amit Varma]: where are the dals and the masalas my father would treat the query with surprise surely
[Amit Varma]: my mother could see that there were more important things in the world but what are we to have
[Amit Varma]: for dinner my mother with Harilal nodding in ascent like a Greek chorus of doom would
[Amit Varma]: ask my father would point out with impeccable logic that he had technically come back with
[Amit Varma]: food the figs were of good quality and in those days frightfully expensive this was
[Amit Varma]: usually the point where my mother flew into a rage and stormed off to see what what could
[Amit Varma]: be cobbled together from odds and ends but she was in a minority the rest of us were
[Amit Varma]: on my father's side especially after I began reading Garcia Marquez the dal could always
[Amit Varma]: be watered it did no harm to anyone to eat khichdi for a few days but Macondo and for
[Amit Varma]: me Nadia Diaz and the banana companies and shipwrecked sailors could not wait a stop
[Guest]: good so thank you for that lovely anecdote thank you it's been it's been so strange to
[Guest]: have your words read back to you and then you realize they're all right they're not
[Guest]: yours anymore they everyone else's and isn't that the beautiful thing about fiction writing
[Guest]: and reading at some point whatever it is you're doing you're just putting stories out there
[Guest]: into the world for everyone you know and that's what makes it magic yeah and also what makes
[Amit Varma]: it magic is it so relatable in different ways where so many people can look at this and
[Amit Varma]: remember their own parents and remember their own childhoods and you know that's what kind
[Amit Varma]: of literature binding us all together so let's take a quick commercial break and on the other
[Amit Varma]: side of the break we'll move on to the toddler Nilanjana okay thanks have you always wanted
[Amit Varma]: to be a writer but never quite gotten down to it well I'd love to help you since April
[Amit Varma]: 2020 I've taught 20 cohorts of my online course the art of clear writing an online community
[Amit Varma]: has now sprung up of all my past students we have workshops a newsletter to showcase
[Amit Varma]: a work of students and vibrant community interaction in the course itself through four webinars
[Amit Varma]: spread over four weekends I share all I know about the craft and practice of clear writing
[Amit Varma]: there are many exercises much interaction a lovely and lively community at the end of
[Amit Varma]: it the course cost rupees 10,000 plus GST or about 150 dollars and is a monthly thing
[Amit Varma]: so if you're interested head on over to register at indiancut.com slash clear writing that's
[Amit Varma]: indiancut.com slash clear writing being a good writer doesn't require god-given talent
[Amit Varma]: just the willingness to work hard and a clear idea of what you need to do to refine your
[Amit Varma]: skills I can help you welcome back to the scene in the unseen I'm chatting with the
[Amit Varma]: remarkable Nilanjana Roy and we are both speaking through sleek and sleek and slinky sleek and
[Amit Varma]: slinky sleek and slinky are excellent microphones over here and you know I was going to go to
[Guest]: your childhood but we'll go to your childhood now I just want to say I feel that if you're
[Guest]: going to spend this much time in close quarters with a mic then you should name it you know
[Guest]: I said that before but it's respectful it's just a nice thing to do it is and it would
[Amit Varma]: be even more respectful to let the mic name you like sleek and slinky might be having
[Amit Varma]: some kind of private conversation now and they have perhaps named us already and who
[Amit Varma]: knows what our names are so you know before we get to your childhood we was just chatting
[Amit Varma]: in the break and I want to actually sort of continue our break conversation earlier when
[Amit Varma]: we were talking about letters you sort of spoke about how there were these three forms
[Amit Varma]: these three landscapes where there is an inland letter there is a postcard and then there
[Amit Varma]: is a longer letter and one of the things that has sort of that I've been thinking about
[Amit Varma]: of late when I think about the creator economy for example is that many of the forms in the
[Amit Varma]: different arts are results of physical limitations so for example the printed book the printed
[Amit Varma]: book it's a physical object it can only be so big and it needs to be at least a certain
[Amit Varma]: thickness so therefore you have a ceiling in the floor for how long a novel should be
[Amit Varma]: or how long a book should be you know that you have the convention of the three minute
[Amit Varma]: song coming because the first sort of record that came out at the start of the 19th century
[Amit Varma]: could hold hold three minutes of music then later the first long playing record could
[Amit Varma]: hold 40 minutes of music and that became the convention for the album and you know your
[Amit Varma]: typical your standard pop song is still kind of supposed to be 30 seconds and as three
[Amit Varma]: minutes rather Spotify now has a 30 second rule where they start paying you after 30
[Amit Varma]: seconds and people are adapting to that in interesting ways and as a creator in the 90s
[Amit Varma]: we used to think in terms of these forms like for me in the hierarchy of literature or writing
[Amit Varma]: the book was the ultimate thing to aspire to so you could write columns or you could
[Amit Varma]: write various things and a book was the end thing that you aspire to and a book was like
[Amit Varma]: a hundred thousand words and you an article could be 800 words and so on and so forth
[Amit Varma]: and you had the same tyranny of form again because of physical limitations and so on
[Amit Varma]: coming about in other in the other arts for example cinema you know where you had these
[Amit Varma]: conventions that a Bollywood film could be three hours and a Hollywood film is 90 minutes
[Amit Varma]: and in television you have 23 minutes which basically you add commercials it becomes half
[Amit Varma]: an hour and what has now happened is that those physical limitations have gone no longer
[Amit Varma]: do we have to submit to the tyranny of form and more and more artists are beginning to
[Amit Varma]: break out of this tyranny like in the break I was telling you about how sad I feel that
[Amit Varma]: in the power broker by Cairo you know a full hundred a book length portion on Jane Jacobs
[Amit Varma]: was just cut and Cairo is one of my favorite writers Jane Jacobs is a hero of mine I would
[Amit Varma]: have loved to read that and unfortunately you know if it still exists you know they
[Amit Varma]: should kind of put it back and but because of physical limitations because of conventional
[Amit Varma]: notions by publishers that this is how much a book should be and we can't go beyond it
[Amit Varma]: it unfortunately had to be excised and thankfully we live in times where that's no longer an
[Amit Varma]: issue but I feel that while creators are beginning to adapt to new forms on new platforms the
[Amit Varma]: mainstream or what remains of it still thinks in very conventional ways like on this date
[Amit Varma]: of recording we're recording this on the 23rd of June you I just looked at your Twitter
[Amit Varma]: I don't know when you put those tweets out but you have a set of tweets about publishers
[Amit Varma]: following trends and how sort of short-sighted and wrong that is and I couldn't agree with
[Amit Varma]: you more and I think what the mainstream sort of does is that your mainstream whether it
[Amit Varma]: is you know a Hollywood studio commissioning films where they say let's go with the franchise
[Amit Varma]: or so and so film has worked let's do five more exactly like it show a distinct lack
[Amit Varma]: of imagination well what is happening in the creator economy is really creators stretching
[Amit Varma]: out trying different things trying whatever the hell they want like five-hour conversations
[Amit Varma]: on podcasts which the mainstream would never accept I mean I could never have sold this
[Amit Varma]: as a concept and then whatever works works and things that change are changing so just
[Amit Varma]: in terms of both of these questions the dissipation of the mainstream which has kind of happened
[Amit Varma]: in media and which will inevitably I think happen in every domain including publishing
[Amit Varma]: in you know in the future of unknown unknowns so one what do you feel about the dissipation
[Amit Varma]: of the mainstream and two as an artist yourself what do you think about like is this something
[Amit Varma]: that you've thought about that forms can be so fluid and flexible and you don't need to
[Amit Varma]: think in one particular way or put yourself in a particular box anymore let's get to the
[Guest]: uses of legacy publishing legacy publishing works really well for a variety of forms per
[Guest]: se and it works well because by and large those publishing houses are staffed by people
[Guest]: who love reading and that's been across the board you know most of the publishers have
[Guest]: met within that universe there's a wide amount of variety by and large what we've seen in
[Guest]: the UK for example is that independent publishers are bolder they're more willing to take risks
[Guest]: they're less dependent on one of the curses of the industry which is that because of the
[Guest]: way everything is packaged you know sometimes two years in advance and you're aiming your
[Guest]: content at a series of bloggers or book loving sections you know book media that's going
[Guest]: to be writing the summer book special of the year whatever you're very dependent on what's
[Guest]: called the strap line which is a condensed form of the blob and it takes some time to
[Guest]: understand that some publishers are absolute genius because their ability to predict and
[Guest]: know their readers not just the market but their readership and say that this book that
[Guest]: I'm publishing now taking it on massaging it into shape for about two years or so revisions
[Guest]: edits all of that that near incredible instinct that a good editor has for how to take a book
[Guest]: to where it should be even though you only have access to what the authors given you
[Guest]: you know that's an incredible skill doesn't get talked about as much as translation and
[Guest]: the skills involved out there but legacy publishing keeps pushing things into categories that
[Guest]: benefit the marketing side of books marketing is not a dirty word either none of us writers
[Guest]: would be alive without marketers but that means that things flow into very rigid categories
[Guest]: you know so you belong to fantasy or science fiction or self-help or whatever and I've
[Guest]: been questioning the use of genre forever because I really don't think that's the way
[Guest]: we read or live honestly you know to me Tolkien years ago or Ursula K. Le Guin she works as
[Guest]: a genre writer and she works as somebody who's got a stunning corpus of ideas recently one
[Guest]: of my colleagues at the FT Robert Shrimsley picked up on Terry Pratchett and said that
[Guest]: everybody who's an economist should read Pratchett for the way that he talks about ideas like
[Guest]: democracy and cities exploding in certain directions and all of that you know there's
[Guest]: not you could learn from him so it's our thinking that boxes the world into this creators by
[Guest]: instinct have you noticed how many people are gravitating to the newsletter as a kind
[Guest]: of modern form of the blog why is that because there's something in us that craves you know
[Guest]: the particular the personal out of the cluster of newsletters are coming in a certain percentage
[Guest]: of creators will fall off when they realize that it's really hard to sustain that some
[Guest]: newsletters I have to say much despite my own love for the form I look at it and I think
[Guest]: I wish they were working in tandem with an editor because this is repetitive or not too
[Guest]: long but you know too familiar the materials may be being a little overworked and a good
[Guest]: editor can make you see stuff that's there but where I itch sometimes to write my own
[Guest]: newsletter and you know that's just one of the many forms that can attract you is in
[Guest]: the absence of constraint so often when you have to massage a condom into 750 words there
[Guest]: are gaps that a sensitive reader picks up they know that something has been left unsaid
[Guest]: okay or sometimes you're doing the opposite I mean I hope I never do that as a columnist
[Guest]: but it used to happen you know back in the day to a lot of other columnists at different
[Guest]: papers you could sense that they were stretching you know that deadline had come up and they
[Guest]: were taking a 350 word insight and pushing that until it filled the full 800 words when
[Guest]: you don't have that constraint that freedom is something that's a extreme challenge and
[Guest]: requires a huge amount of technical skill actually to manage well but think about it
[Guest]: this way you have a world two kinds of worlds that have been pushing at us for a while saying
[Guest]: listen legacy publishing is not everything that there could be one is the extremely sophisticated
[Guest]: and layered world of fan fiction most people in the public arena know fan fiction only
[Guest]: as E.L. James you know her book Fifty Shades of Grey came out of that but fan fiction is
[Guest]: where it's a it's an enormous playground and a serious serious place for people who want
[Guest]: to be writers and are not that concerned with marketing they're more into readership rather
[Guest]: than sales let's put it that way and it's very satisfying for them it's also something
[Guest]: that frequently pushes back at whatever mainstream writers even celebrated people even big names
[Guest]: have made you know I mean a long time ago Hogwarts fan fiction or Harry Potter fan fiction
[Guest]: was sitting there and punching very lightly in its own way at the areas where the books
[Guest]: creator couldn't see you see what I mean so they were saying instead of saying in a column
[Guest]: the portrayal of goblins verges on the racist they were creating their own fanfics where
[Guest]: the goblins were the heroes of the story you know and that is such a beautiful way to make
[Guest]: a criticism by creating something new and original yourself and the other part of it
[Guest]: has been I'm a little skeptical of the huge marketing passion for this but book talk you
[Guest]: know where young teens and young adults have started to discover their own books and push
[Guest]: trends it seems to me that after a while book talk is also like a lot of Instagram influencing
[Guest]: becoming conformist and moving away from it slightly anarchic things so to answer your
[Guest]: question a little more succinctly let's say we have an opportunity and the way that the
[Guest]: internet goes the way that the mainstream and the side stream if you want to call it
[Guest]: that goes is first we expand out into this territory of almost limitless possibility
[Guest]: which is what the first wave of the internet was and then at some point we get corral back
[Guest]: into safety and into a little corporate zones and into the marketability of this that and
[Guest]: the other but one of the things in the few workshops that I've done one of the things
[Guest]: that I try to tell people who want to be writers for a lifetime is how would you write if you
[Guest]: were not going to make any money from this whatsoever or any fame you know then what
[Guest]: is it that you would do your thick desire your most deepest intense you know the writing
[Guest]: that's going to wake you up and bring you to life and that could be anything I'm genre
[Guest]: indifferent you know I'm not quality indifferent within your genre try at least to learn what
[Guest]: the basic rules are not because rules are rules but because you're striving for a certain
[Guest]: kind of clarity if you want to share a story then don't leave it messy and bristling when
[Guest]: you can do better do the best that you can within that right but I've also learned a
[Guest]: lot from the Hindi writing tradition for example of just letting a story come to you and setting
[Guest]: it down in that moment a lot of the women writers particularly Hindi and Bengali the
[Guest]: worlds that I know best outside of English taught themselves to write in very small segments
[Guest]: of time you know so there's no question of we set up and then we think about this and
[Guest]: we do this and that and the other it's like no we get right to it in between cooking this
[Guest]: in between managing the household in between doing our other work we learn to set down
[Guest]: four paragraphs and make that sink you know so I think what we are getting to is a very
[Guest]: very old truth the importance of form something I was thinking about market forces you don't
[Guest]: see that many playwrights in India in her generation I can think of basically Ani Zaidi
[Guest]: and maybe one or two others and that's about it I do see can I come in with a small note
[Guest]: of complaint yeah and I'm exempting really good writers of recent novels they know who
[Guest]: they are I hope you know and some of them have done incredible work from Shivani Sibal
[Guest]: to Dinsey Pereira to you know a host of others but if you're writing to the market then you're
[Guest]: not just in danger of losing an audience or losing a chance you're in danger of something
[Guest]: much sadder which is that you might never find out the kind of writer that you really
[Guest]: should be right in recent years it seems to me that the the people who made their name
[Guest]: in Indian English fiction were all told at that time there is no money in writing there's
[Guest]: no use being a writer later they became famous you know everyone from Salman Rushdie to Vikram
[Guest]: Seth to Amitav Ghosh the entire universe Kiran Desai etc but at that time they were told
[Guest]: there is no reward in it and they went ahead and wrote what they wanted to anyway and I
[Guest]: think there's a huge lesson out there I see a lot of literary fiction coming out first
[Guest]: phase people are either trying to be Chetan Bhagat and in all these years there's only
[Guest]: been one person at the top of the mythological fiction category of the popular fiction category
[Guest]: there are very few imitators who really make it you know maybe because they're trying to
[Guest]: imitate too hard Ankur Warriko on the other hand you know who's coming in with very Indian
[Guest]: self-help but something that's new and refreshing then that's saying basically we're going to
[Guest]: turn our back on politics but if you want good habits and a successful life and you
[Guest]: want to have fun along the way here it is he's got a message a lot of the young Indian
[Guest]: historians you know from Anjan Manotra to Manu to that entire range of Iramukoti etc
[Guest]: they are on to something because they are following something that they are individually
[Guest]: passionate about right when you write to the market you lose that edge so coming back to
[Guest]: your question the field of possibility ahead of us I think we're all sensing that there's
[Guest]: something out here beyond the mainstream and by the mainstream I'm not saying just legacy
[Guest]: publishers now I'm seeing also the kind of media I've written for all my life I have
[Guest]: a great respect for them and their traditions the New York Times Business Standard Financial
[Guest]: Times all the places that I've written for you know the BBC etc they have a history and
[Guest]: a tradition of respect for the process of fact-checking of shaping a story a particular
[Guest]: way and it's wonderful to be part of that repository but I think as an independent creator
[Guest]: if you have the guts and you have the honesty as well right it's one thing to say I want
[Guest]: to write like Arundhati Roy what if you really want to write the Indian equivalent of Regency
[Guest]: romances are you never going to find out you know what if you want to create something
[Guest]: that doesn't exist at this moment you know some kind of a comic book or historical steampunk
[Guest]: mashup and you're not doing it just because you were trying so hard to be somebody else
[Guest]: or to do what the market rewards you know ultimately it just keeps coming back to this
[Guest]: I know that there is also a practical side to everyone's writing life or writing career
[Guest]: but don't follow the practical side of things to the point where you miss out on the true
[Guest]: joy of being either a writer or a reader something that you were saying just a moment back about
[Guest]: audio books and I was thinking about how I grew bored at some point of time about this
[Guest]: debate between the Kindle and reading books I take the Kindle on my Kindle everywhere
[Guest]: when I'm traveling because it's the easiest way to take along half a library and I notice
[Guest]: I read differently on the Kindle you know what I was saying about being out of space
[Guest]: and time is compensated for by the fact that I love reading poetry on the Kindle there's
[Guest]: something about that screen and an individual poem that really makes it sing I hate reading
[Guest]: long involved novels in e-book form but that's just me I prefer to read them I either as
[Guest]: printouts or as books but I love the Kindle for short stories and instinctively I seem
[Guest]: to read a lot more in the way of popular nonfiction on the Kindle so you know that's just another
[Guest]: example of the way a platform has changed me with audio books there's no escaping it
[Guest]: I do notice that I retain less in terms of you know remembering the exact order in which
[Guest]: arguments have been made in a book if I listen to the audio book version but there is a compensating
[Guest]: factor sometimes the characterization particularly if the narrator of the audio book is good
[Guest]: I get the characterization better I give up a little bit of my independence as the reader
[Guest]: to imagine the voices and the landscape the way I want to in that sense an audio book
[Guest]: narrator is also you know like a translator a co-creator right and sometimes you can just
[Guest]: settle back into that creation and have it sing to you you see what I mean I think a
[Guest]: lot of people in India do use audio books more practically so you know when you start
[Guest]: to move into all of this you start to see that where you expected things to be linear
[Guest]: they aren't all of these forms of storytelling and receiving stories there's no one above
[Guest]: the other there is really a democracy out there in terms of you know if you prefer paper
[Guest]: books that's fantastic but you know for every I don't want to I do love the smell of paper
[Guest]: myself but sometimes every so often because I live in Delhi right and it's hot and humid
[Guest]: simultaneously in summer and the smell of second-hand paper books can bring to mind
[Guest]: a not very clean bathroom I'm not as romantic about the smell of papers other people are
[Guest]: I just think it changes depending on place and time and stuff like that that was a long
[Guest]: long direct digression but getting serious for a second I think the more we try to write
[Guest]: what already has been written of course when you start off as a writer sometimes you're
[Guest]: imitating the first three things I tried to write came out sounding like the writers I
[Guest]: love the most you know I was trying to write serious social commentary like Mahasweta Debi
[Guest]: the great Bengali writer who spent a lot of her life you know really listening to her
[Guest]: friends who were part of tribal India and coming up with a completely different consciousness
[Guest]: but she had a fierce political way of writing that is probably not me and I would be wise
[Guest]: to find my own voice the first novel I wrote which is thankfully dead buried and disappeared
[Guest]: in one of our many house moves was like a terrible terrible mashup between Garcia Marquez
[Guest]: and you know Nair Masood it was so derivative and all of that and I don't mind actually
[Guest]: confessing that because I think we learn how to write again by imitating and we imitate
[Guest]: who we want to be until we figure out who we are ourselves yeah what writing gives you
[Guest]: is the freedom not just to imagine different things but really to step into very very distinct
[Guest]: worlds and to be different people in your lifetime you're not gonna get that many chances
[Guest]: unless you're an actor or something of the sort you don't get that many chances to be
[Guest]: completely different from who you are and that's part of the writing that is most thrilling
[Guest]: to me in terms of possibilities so again coming back to the whole thing of form it's not just
[Guest]: that you're removing restraints you also unconsciously challenging people instead of you know Twitter
[Guest]: that scroll down thing or Facebook that wall what can you do with the space of a screen
[Guest]: and I've seen so many writers particularly the poets always seem to be the most inventive
[Guest]: of the lot but you know use that suddenly realize that on a screen you've got a left
[Guest]: field space maybe that's on a page less populated but on a screen you can dance out there you
[Guest]: can do things out there you can bring in images you can build something around that you can
[Guest]: collage you know there's there's really no limit you can dance with Milan Soman on a
[Amit Varma]: screen out there a bunch of responses but one I really you know like that question what
[Amit Varma]: would you write if no one was to read you it sort of reminds me of the quote that character
[Amit Varma]: is what you do when no one's looking and you know one of the pieces of advice I give creators
[Amit Varma]: both those who do my writing course in my podcasting course like I remember the first
[Amit Varma]: time I taught the taught my podcasting course which I teach about twice a year someone asked
[Amit Varma]: about you know where are the gaps in the market or what should I aim for or do you have any
[Amit Varma]: suggestions and I was like that is completely the wrong way to think that you know one if
[Amit Varma]: there are any quote-unquote gaps in the quote-unquote market many others are going to discover it
[Amit Varma]: and go for it but that's the wrong way to think you know if there are like seven billion
[Amit Varma]: people on this planet and there are more than a million podcasts out there the only thing
[Amit Varma]: that makes you unique is you because only you are you so the the most important quality
[Amit Varma]: for creators who succeed is that they are authentic to themselves and that totally speaks
[Amit Varma]: to your point about don't think about the market quote-unquote or what people may want
[Amit Varma]: to read or what people may want to listen to or whatever you've just got to figure out
[Amit Varma]: what you want to do and kind of go for that eventually it'll work out and I'll circle
[Amit Varma]: back to this but first I'll make a point about I'll share a thought about blogs and newsletters
[Amit Varma]: first of all for all my listeners who may not have been active during the first the
[Amit Varma]: first internet the early internet as it were there was this around the time I started blogging
[Amit Varma]: at India Uncut there was also an excellent blog written by someone called Kitab Khana
[Amit Varma]: written by someone called Hari Babu and there was much mystery over who is this Hari Babu
[Amit Varma]: who is this sort of mysterious person who is writing so well about literature and became
[Amit Varma]: almost a cult figure and it turned out later that Hari Babu was Nilanjana Roy herself and
[Amit Varma]: and I mean there was another pseudonymous blog Puttu the Cat which was Samit Basu so
[Amit Varma]: these are the two famous sort of pseudonymous blogs which people really loved reading and
[Amit Varma]: speculating on and it turned out that he were Hari Babu and what I loved about blogs in
[Amit Varma]: that time like you mentioned he started freed you from that tyranny of form you didn't have
[Amit Varma]: to do 800 words you could do 30 words you know and those were the days before micro
[Amit Varma]: blogging you could just put a link to something with a one sentence comment and that was it
[Amit Varma]: or you could do a thousand words if you wanted there's simply no limitation you were freed
[Amit Varma]: also from the tyranny of the news cycle for example otherwise if you're proposing an op-ed
[Amit Varma]: or an opinion piece it has to be something topical and you also kind of put in volume
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that you wrote a lot like I wrote you know five posts a day on average I did
[Amit Varma]: some 8000 posts in the five years reddit was active and one I wasn't self-conscious because
[Amit Varma]: my job was in mainstream journalism and for me this was like a release it's just a blog
[Amit Varma]: who's going to read it so you know that's how you start and then you lose that self-consciousness
[Amit Varma]: and you're just doing what you're doing and it worked for that reason however when people
[Amit Varma]: ask me today where they should write should they do a blog I always say no I say they
[Amit Varma]: should do a newsletter and the reason is that I think destination websites are pretty much
[Amit Varma]: done very few people are typing out URLs or like indiancut.com or haribabu.com or whatever
[Amit Varma]: it was and actually going to a destination website people are clicking on links on social
[Amit Varma]: media and so on and so forth and what a newsletter does is that you read an interesting piece
[Amit Varma]: by say Nilanjana Roy you immediately subscribe and instantly you are forever getting you
[Amit Varma]: know everything that Nilanjana Roy writes right into your inbox there is no effort it
[Amit Varma]: comes into your inbox you click it it's there and what that means for a creator like you
[Amit Varma]: is that you are building a community of people who like your writing which earlier you could
[Amit Varma]: not do this is one of the great things about the creator economy like in you write something
[Amit Varma]: in 1995 in Business Standard or Times of India or Indian Express or wherever someone reads
[Amit Varma]: that piece thinks huh this is nice and then they forget about it a week later and it's
[Amit Varma]: gone but here you're collecting a community of your fans and what newsletters allow you
[Amit Varma]: to do is a couple of things one is the other great quality you know if authenticity to
[Amit Varma]: yourself is a fundamental quality for a creator to have a fundamental quality of the relationship
[Amit Varma]: between a creator and the audience is a certain intimacy right which is really underrated
[Amit Varma]: because for example one of the finest compliments I've got for the podcast was someone heard
[Amit Varma]: my episode with Abhinandan Sekri and said that I felt so much like I'm sitting on a
[Amit Varma]: sofa listening to two friends talking that at one point I interrupted before realizing
[Amit Varma]: that what the fuck I'm listening to a podcast right and that intimacy is incredible and
[Amit Varma]: what that intimacy does and that intimacy happens because you're authentic to yourself
[Amit Varma]: you're not projecting you're not bullshitting you're just who you are and there is that
[Amit Varma]: intimacy your what you've written has gone directly to someone's inbox or is in their
[Amit Varma]: ears because they're kind of listening to it and what it does is and I'm thinking aloud
[Amit Varma]: here so I don't know if I'm coining this or someone has simultaneously done it but I think
[Amit Varma]: I'd make a difference between thick engagement and thin engagement and what that intimacy
[Amit Varma]: leads to is a kind of thick engagement where you feel intertwined with the concerns or
[Amit Varma]: the art of the person that you're listening to or reading or whatever and there then the
[Amit Varma]: absolute numbers don't matter so much like I would I would give far more value to a hundred
[Amit Varma]: thousand listeners for an episode of my podcast than say 20 million views on a YouTube video
[Amit Varma]: because in the YouTube video your average time of you know listening might be 15-20
[Amit Varma]: seconds your engagement is much lower but here the engagement for the lower number of
[Amit Varma]: in terms of absolute numbers your engagement there is much deeper these people really really
[Amit Varma]: care and newsletters allow you to build an audience of people who really care about your
[Amit Varma]: work and the final important point here is and I'll lead to a question on this with you
[Amit Varma]: because it's something that I can't I've been thinking about and don't have an answer to
[Amit Varma]: but the final important point is that a newsletter allows you as a blog did to put in volume
[Amit Varma]: in the sense it allows you to put in a lot of work like the five posts I did during India
[Amit Varma]: uncut during when my blog was active for example and to me this is important because how does
[Amit Varma]: a creator become good a creator becomes good by doing something again and again and again
[Amit Varma]: and again and again by constant iteration and a danger for creators is if you care too
[Amit Varma]: much about validation initially your numbers won't be good initially when you do something
[Amit Varma]: you will suck at it like I sucked at blogging or I sucked at podcasting when I began you
[Amit Varma]: do it again and again you become better now initially you will never have numbers so if
[Amit Varma]: you care about validation you will simply not you know you'll stop at some point and
[Amit Varma]: therefore you won't iterate enough to actually become good at it which is why it's that question
[Amit Varma]: to circle back to it what would you write if no one was reading is incredibly important
[Amit Varma]: that's what you should write because initially no one will be reading and then because you
[Amit Varma]: write that again and again and again you get good at it and you build that audience organically
[Amit Varma]: and so the value of putting in volume which is a term poker players use get a large sample
[Amit Varma]: size play a lot of fans so I don't know if others use this terminology but the value
[Amit Varma]: of putting in volume is that in a sense quantity does lead to quality one you do something
[Amit Varma]: again and again you become better to you grow your audience organically by doing something
[Amit Varma]: again and again and constant exposure and my question is that where this kind of breaks
[Amit Varma]: down of the context in which I can't figure out how this works is the context of novels
[Amit Varma]: and literature because a novelist for example will write one book for eight years they're
[Amit Varma]: not putting in volume they spend eight years they write one book they take a break the
[Amit Varma]: book goes out in the world and most of the time for most novelists it just disappears
[Amit Varma]: it's like nothing happened right and then you got to get back to the grind and you're
[Amit Varma]: not putting in volume in the same sense that you know that a blogger is or a newsletter
[Amit Varma]: writer is and all of that and this befuddles me a bit because I think if you are a storyteller
[Amit Varma]: if you are a person of the imagination if you love writing on the one hand you might
[Amit Varma]: want to write novels because that's the kind of sprawling work you want to do but on the
[Amit Varma]: other hand it runs into this sort of problem and one question of course is that are there
[Amit Varma]: other things you could simultaneously do with your creative faculties whether you're doing
[Amit Varma]: a newsletter thing I think Substack is doing something with Salman Rushdie but I haven't
[Amit Varma]: looked at it too closely but it feels a little gimmicky but should artists explore other
[Amit Varma]: forms like that and kind of work at it because there's a danger also I think for someone
[Amit Varma]: who's a novelist to think inside a box and think I am a novelist so you think inside
[Amit Varma]: the novel box and you don't go outside it and my final tangential point I was talking
[Amit Varma]: to someone who works in marketing in the publishing industry just a couple of days ago and the
[Amit Varma]: point that I made is sort of an idealistic point in one way which is that a good product
[Amit Varma]: is the best marketing and that's obviously necessary for something to work but also what
[Amit Varma]: I was trying to point to is that when say a book is released I think there can be the
[Amit Varma]: tendency to make a marketing plan and say that okay we'll do this on Instagram, we'll
[Amit Varma]: do this on Twitter, blah blah blah and you make those different, we'll do this on YouTube
[Amit Varma]: and then you're just ticking boxes and it's kind of automatic and it has zero impact with
[Amit Varma]: the world because it is shallow and because therefore you have thin engagement to use
[Amit Varma]: that term again whereas if authors and artists sort of thought of everything they do not
[Amit Varma]: as marketing but as a kind of content on its own then I think that there is you know that
[Amit Varma]: will create thinking engagement at whatever level it does so for example if you've written
[Amit Varma]: a novel and one of your characters is simultaneously writing a newsletter even if it's a minor
[Amit Varma]: character then I think that engagement goes off the charts and even for the creator you
[Amit Varma]: know your juices are churning in different ways so I mean again I have sort of digressed
[Amit Varma]: a bit and you know but this is sort of a subject I think about a fair bit so what are your
[Amit Varma]: sort of thoughts on this?
[Guest]: Why do you write, why do you write?
[Guest]: I think in the 20th and 21st century we probably put more effort into the anxiety behind that
[Guest]: question what are we writing for, what's the point if 80% of novels fail then why should
[Guest]: anyone be a novelist at all but I think right from the start of the human history of writing
[Guest]: and I wish you could see what's in my mind right now because I'm literally you know zooming
[Guest]: back across the centuries and seeing people fall in love with different forms they falling
[Guest]: in love with the epic they're falling in love with the Arabian Nights type nested boxes
[Amit Varma]: except you're not literally zooming back through the centuries.
[Guest]: I am literally not literally but the imagination is a powerful thing you know at different
[Guest]: times they think the fable is it the fable is where the smart money is you know at another
[Guest]: stage all the cool kids want to be Chaucer or they want to be Kadidas or something of
[Guest]: the sort right common to all of that is the thread of something so deep and so shallow
[Guest]: simultaneously why do you want to create you know what is the satisfaction of putting this
[Guest]: world out there.
[Guest]: I've seen novelists at different levels someone like Stephen King is 74 years old almost 75
[Guest]: and has probably written almost as many books as his age you know he's gone well past 70
[Guest]: and so he puts the myth of you know a novel must take so much time and you must live in
[Guest]: the side the hulk of this structure to rest.
[Guest]: I took a lot of time to write The Wildings but that's because I'm very lazy and I got
[Guest]: distracted by an infinity of things and I spent so much time on the world building I
[Guest]: didn't need to spend that kind of time but the truth is I loved it you know there's a
[Guest]: lot of stuff that didn't find its way into the book like I found this old chart where
[Guest]: I'd done a cat's lifespan and a squirrel's lifespan and a bird's lifespan and tried to
[Guest]: figure out what their days would feel like to them.
[Guest]: There was the time that I decided that one had to see the world from the perspective
[Guest]: of different people and I spent an infinite amount of time not an infinite a finite but
[Guest]: considerable amount of time trying to figure out the difference between how bats process
[Guest]: night and birds process night.
[Guest]: At the end of it the bats have one paragraph in the book or something like that.
[Guest]: There's a great essay by Thomas Nagel, what is it like to be a bat?
[Guest]: I read that one as well as part of my research okay but the reason I was doing that much
[Guest]: research was partly just for the fun of it partly because I really didn't know anything
[Guest]: about world building at that time and I was giving myself my MFA privately in the whole
[Guest]: world building thing and the third reason was procrastination as long as I was researching
[Guest]: I didn't have to get down to the book.
[Guest]: The thing is that novels if you do them right they live for a very very long time.
[Guest]: Some of the novels that we have have lasted for well over 300 years or so.
[Guest]: The epics that we have, the myths that we have, the fables that we have are not literally
[Guest]: but in effect they are timeless, they have been there in our minds and carried from one
[Guest]: generation to the other.
[Guest]: Something you realize, why would you do this?
[Guest]: Why would you be a novelist?
[Guest]: When you're actually writing you realize the thing that sounds so twee when you say it
[Guest]: but it is absolutely I assure you 100% true.
[Guest]: Stories and ideas and storytelling has a peculiar life to it of its own.
[Guest]: When you try to start writing a novel you're usually getting it wrong, everything feels
[Guest]: dead on the page.
[Guest]: There's a moment where you enter the life of the book and you will not know even when
[Guest]: the book comes out and the reviews come out and readers say nice things or whatever it
[Guest]: is you will actually not know whether your book is alive or not for many years afterwards.
[Guest]: But that aliveness is indescribable, it's electric, it's the kind of feeling that you
[Guest]: have if not the power of being a god but let's say the awe of being a god and bringing a
[Guest]: world into full view and that you would spend years on anytime, any day.
[Guest]: It is so rewarding, it is one of the most beautiful things in the world because there's
[Guest]: no way you can shorten that timeline.
[Guest]: You might take just three months to write a novel, you might take four years, you might
[Guest]: take eight years but the individual book, the individual tale, the aliveness that it
[Guest]: accrues over a period of time, whatever that process is it can't be shortened.
[Guest]: Sometimes it's so intense that it feels as though you're possessed, it feels as though
[Guest]: the story is writing itself through you.
[Guest]: Sometimes you have to struggle to, one of my characters in Black River spent years just
[Guest]: saying, sorry you don't know enough about me, you know you're still viewing me as an
[Guest]: interview subject and this was all wordless communication.
[Guest]: It's only when you can see from behind my eyes, that's not my phrase, I think that's
[Guest]: Michael Dundati's but it's only when you can get to that point and the reason you're
[Guest]: trying to get it right and you're trying to sand down edges and bring it more and more
[Guest]: to life is not for the perfect sentences or the beauty of an image, all you're trying
[Guest]: to do is to do some justice to this world that is of your creation but that is also
[Guest]: coming from somewhere beyond your left shoulder, you know.
[Guest]: And to be part of that whether it's a novel you're writing or whether it's one of Paula
[Guest]: Reggio's incredible paintings she just passed away some weeks ago or whether it's a dance
[Guest]: performance where your act of creation is in that moment on the stage and then you have
[Guest]: to go back and repeat it the next day or something of the sort.
[Guest]: You see what I'm saying, there's something about the process of creation itself so long
[Guest]: as you don't get pompous and sonorous about it but I can tell you something that process
[Guest]: is when you feel most alive, you know, and there are other ways in which to feel alive
[Guest]: on earth, you know, for some people it's sex, food, money, power, for some people it's adrenaline
[Guest]: and thrills but I can tell you something, this thrill goes beyond everything else.
[Guest]: You can channel it into 50 different directions, getting down from those, you know, high, high
[Guest]: mountaintops into the practical side of life, there's absolutely no reason why an author
[Guest]: can't do or be both and we keep talking about engagement, audience, all of that but the
[Guest]: word that you used, intimacy, connection, right.
[Guest]: In this rushing world that has changed so much from the time that, you know, I'm a little
[Guest]: older than you but our childhoods overlapped and I think we look at this world saying that
[Guest]: it's a world of infinite resource but very little satisfaction.
[Guest]: So what you're trying to do as a writer whether it's with a newsletter or a novel is also
[Guest]: to reconnect and to get people hopefully to re-see.
[Guest]: The other reason, we didn't realize this, I don't think I ever thought about the, you
[Guest]: know, internal emotional journey of blogging or something of the sort when I was Hari Babu,
[Guest]: I picked his name out of Kipling and decided to, you know, rescue the Babu from the clutches
[Guest]: of the Raj and turn him to good account but hiding behind a pseudonym also freed me up.
[Guest]: It freed up a voice I didn't know I had and maybe it was an embryo, you know, early starting
[Guest]: towards becoming a novelist even though I couldn't at that time admit to myself that
[Guest]: I wanted to be a writer.
[Guest]: There was something important I wanted to say about that, yes, about the blogs I think
[Guest]: what we didn't realize we were doing at that stage was that we, through our attention,
[Guest]: we were getting to understand our territory, right.
[Guest]: As a writer, as a sports person, whatever it is that you decide that you're going to
[Guest]: do, the thing that people have in common who really achieve something great with their
[Guest]: lives and I'm not saying in terms of success, that's great, but I'm saying in terms of creating
[Guest]: something of lasting worth or of lasting joy, forget about the word, you know, is their
[Guest]: ability to filter out distraction and what a blog does did then and what a newsletter
[Guest]: does now is just allow you within that space of easy armchair sitting back intimacy to
[Guest]: say this is what I really find fascinating.
[Guest]: Why can you not do it in any other way because even as we're talking we're generating I think
[Guest]: a million ideas, everything that you're saying, I'm like, okay, you know, why didn't I think
[Guest]: of this, the new creator economy moves in this fashion, but the new creator ecology
[Guest]: is to me almost as fascinating, if not more fascinating than the economy, but I'm looking
[Guest]: at these things and I'm thinking we're going back to very, very old fashioned emotions,
[Guest]: emotional needs, psychic needs, if you like, what is this craving for Amit, you know, this
[Guest]: craving is for depth, intimacy, curiosity, attention, the training of that attention,
[Guest]: discovery, satisfaction, sharing, isn't that what we're talking about, isn't that the journey
[Guest]: of a creator in whatever form?
[Amit Varma]: What's the difference between creator economy and creator ecology, by the way, in the ways
[Guest]: that you sort of use it?
[Guest]: Again, it's something that I'm visualizing as I speak, when I think of the creator economy,
[Guest]: I think of the nuts and bolts of it, you know, how do you not just a simple thing of how
[Guest]: do you monetize a newsletter, but in other ways as well, you know, how do you fuel this?
[Guest]: It's very easy for anyone who's lived any kind of life to write maybe four newsletters,
[Guest]: but part of your economy would be how do you keep generating the interest and the ideas?
[Guest]: What is it that your ground is?
[Guest]: What is it that you want to share with people?
[Guest]: And the economy is also the economy of attention, the economy of money, etc.
[Guest]: And that there's an entire infrastructure that goes along with it.
[Guest]: When I think of the creator ecology, I'm back where we started with the blogs and stuff,
[Guest]: which is what was the environment like?
[Guest]: It was very tilted.
[Guest]: First world blogging was much more populated and much more present than our world blogging.
[Guest]: And yet we could make our presence felt, it was still a fair landscape.
[Guest]: It was not, you know, our voices were not drowned out.
[Guest]: There was also a lot of language blogging, you know, which woke up a need in me to read
[Guest]: beyond English.
[Guest]: I don't write in Hindi and Bangla.
[Guest]: My Hindi is still unfortunately, my spoken Hindi is very, very Bengali inflected.
[Guest]: But I would not give up the pleasure that I've had from reading in Hindi, Bengali and
[Guest]: English simultaneously all these years, you know, it's just a joy and language blogging
[Guest]: was a lot like that.
[Guest]: When I look at the creative ecology, I look at people unconsciously moving outside of
[Guest]: the grasp, the stickiness of Insta, Facebook, Twitter, TikTok, you know, those are great
[Guest]: training grounds.
[Guest]: But at some point, I keep waiting for the MySpace kind of thing, where the owners of
[Guest]: those spaces, which is some giant corporation, will fold them up or change them to the point
[Guest]: where they no longer, you know, as it is Twitter for anyone who has a right wing active has
[Guest]: changed, you know, in the early days, it used to be a safe space for us.
[Guest]: So for Americans, or for Hong Kong liberals, and now it's not.
[Guest]: And as a result, you're already censoring yourself for already being careful about what
[Guest]: you see, is this going to get me into trouble?
[Guest]: It's not a free space anymore, if that makes sense.
[Guest]: With Facebook, the problem is slightly different.
[Guest]: It's gone from being the pleasure of sharing your status updates and generating discussion
[Guest]: on your page to being a very cluttered space.
[Guest]: And frankly, a very elderly space as well, you know, you don't have young people out
[Guest]: there.
[Guest]: TikTok is great fun, but it's also very quick, quick, quick, you know, with Instagram.
[Guest]: I love Instagram, it's very peaceful.
[Guest]: It takes me to many places, art and design Instagram is fascinating.
[Guest]: But if you notice, you never go backwards with these spaces.
[Guest]: You never stop and you never reverse gear.
[Guest]: You're always in an endless present or scrolling future.
[Guest]: And one thing you're trying to do with this new creator ecology is to create something
[Guest]: that is an evolution from the blogs.
[Guest]: The way I see it is a kind of linkage, you know, I see again, the web part of the World
[Guest]: Wide Web, if that makes sense, and intermeshing rather than a separate silos.
[Guest]: The promise yet again, of a hierarchy-less world, which will eventually become hierarchical
[Guest]: and then evolve out and be replaced with something else.
[Guest]: But when I think of the ecology, I actually think of intertwining wires, creepers, whatever
[Guest]: you want to call it, I think of something living and breathing.
[Guest]: Already among writer newsletters, which is the narrow area that I follow, because people
[Guest]: are reading each other's newsletters on creativity and craft and all of that.
[Guest]: What's happening seems much less like independent nodes and more like a conversation and interchange
[Amit Varma]: and exchange.
[Guest]: Like the roots of trees in a forest.
[Guest]: Yes, that's exactly what I was thinking about.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, I agree with all of this, except that I think of economy in a slightly different
[Amit Varma]: way.
[Amit Varma]: But perhaps an umbrella term is a creator ecosystem, which sounds very, you know, jargony
[Amit Varma]: and corporate like and defined, but I would include all of this in that as well.
[Amit Varma]: Because I don't think the creator economy is just about the big platforms like Instagram
[Amit Varma]: or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: It's also about this conversation you and I are having or even other things that may
[Amit Varma]: not necessarily have an audience, but we are creators, we do what we do.
[Amit Varma]: And so it's all of that, I mean, to me an economy is really a web of voluntary interactions
[Amit Varma]: and it just goes into all kinds of directions.
[Amit Varma]: And again, and those wondering that what are they talking about roots of trees in forests,
[Amit Varma]: what is this?
[Amit Varma]: I'd recommend this lovely book by Peter Walgreen called The Hidden Life of Trees, which is
[Amit Varma]: such a lovely book, isn't it?
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: I like a lot of the new writing that's coming up around trees around the earth and, you
[Guest]: know, where we are pausing in this moment.
[Guest]: And Ed Yong's just out with an incredible book about the inner lives, the emotional
[Guest]: lives of animals.
[Amit Varma]: Well, yeah, I saw the cover, but I didn't, I haven't read it yet.
[Guest]: I'm just just started on that.
[Guest]: But I was looking at all of this and I was thinking, you know, there's a lot of debates
[Guest]: coming up against with nature writing, with people saying, OK, wonder is all very well,
[Guest]: but more than wonder, you know, maybe we're finally taking our place in the world.
[Guest]: You see what I mean?
[Guest]: We're finally seeing ourselves not just as a human species, but as a human species embedded
[Guest]: in something very real.
[Guest]: And again, the world that we are talking about, books, internet spaces, these are landscapes
[Guest]: of their own, if that makes sense.
[Guest]: I sense that we haven't yet fully explored the tension between the new world and the
[Guest]: old world way of doing things.
[Guest]: I've been so one way or the other connected with the old landscape, right?
[Guest]: Which is legacy publishers, legacy media.
[Guest]: What's changed with them after a while is that you no longer have the expectation of
[Guest]: working with the same editor over a long period of time or that you no longer can rely on
[Guest]: job security.
[Guest]: You know, what happened even with legacy media was a lot of organizations expanding, opening
[Guest]: up their tents and then crashing dramatically five years down the line.
[Guest]: I think there are very, very few places that continue to stay standing as institutions.
[Guest]: We are losing that entire sense.
[Guest]: With the new world, I'm a cynic after so many years of being online.
[Guest]: And I look at the possibilities, but I also wonder how long it will take for us to mess
[Guest]: it up, you know.
[Guest]: On the other hand, you can't be that cynical.
[Guest]: There's a point of time at which you have to look at what this enables.
[Guest]: And I have, you know, both you and Roshan Abbas and a lot of other people are saying
[Guest]: that the next five, six, ten years is likely to be a really, really interesting time for
[Guest]: anybody who's willing to take individual responsibility, okay, for their lives and stuff.
[Guest]: And something about the way newsletters work may remind me again of something from the
[Guest]: Hindi writing world, Gitanjali Shree and a lot of writers, they will just automatically
[Guest]: have their addresses, their own home addresses printed on the back or front flap of the book.
[Guest]: Because the assumption is that if you write a book, you want readers to get in touch with
[Guest]: you, you know.
[Guest]: And I was just asking myself, when did we lose that in the English language world?
[Guest]: You know, or did we never have that, was our concept of writing always somebody quietly
[Guest]: there in their individual silo or castle, unapproachable, accepted festivals or something
[Guest]: of the sort?
[Guest]: You know, it's a difference.
[Guest]: It's not just a small thing, if you know what I mean.
[Guest]: This is the more time I spend in writing and reading, the more I realize and I'm not saying
[Guest]: this as a humble brag, it's not about reading so much, but you realize with the shock that
[Guest]: with every choice you're making with your reading, there's so much else that you're
[Guest]: not going to know, you know.
[Guest]: So if I'm reading a lot of literary fiction set in the present, then I'm not going to
[Guest]: be reading that many classics from the past.
[Guest]: If I'm reading thrillers and if I'm reading a lot of books on the environment, then the
[Guest]: amount of time I have to spend reading food books has gone down, you know.
[Guest]: And I still, I've lived half a century and sometimes I still feel like I'm still 20,
[Guest]: reaching out for the world and saying, just give me more, there is so much to explore.
[Guest]: I don't know, those different parts of your life, there's the part that wants to create,
[Guest]: there's the part that wants to sit back and listen to other people or to read their work
[Guest]: or to experience their creations.
[Guest]: And there's the part that's just like, my God, you know, there's so much to explore,
[Guest]: despite, I mean, I know we get depressed at the headlines and all of that.
[Guest]: But I think something that's been continuous through all these decades, and I'm just looking
[Guest]: back at it and thinking, you know, childhood was books coming out of the family cupboards
[Guest]: and stuff like that, and adolescence was a lot of traveling and the 20s, there was the
[Guest]: whole wide world of the internet coming at you, you know, this new frontier to explore.
[Guest]: And my God, I just hope none of us ever loses our sense of wonder.
[Guest]: You know what I mean?
[Guest]: Behind all of these questions and all of that, you know, whatever you want to do with reading
[Guest]: or writing, I think, I mean, of course, you write sometimes to witness terrible things
[Guest]: and all of that.
[Guest]: But I think all of this is just a journey into keeping your curiosity alive, and trying
[Guest]: to find ways never to let that go in the pursuit of this goal or that goal or must have, you
[Guest]: know, bungalow car, etc.
[Guest]: Those are all very valid goals, nice things to do.
[Guest]: But I cannot imagine living a life without curiosity, without wonder, without exploration.
[Amit Varma]: Can you?
[Amit Varma]: No, I can't.
[Amit Varma]: And this is what I have to keep reminding myself, because I don't think I think it's
[Amit Varma]: a daily choice, in the sense that I don't think that you can tell yourself that I'm
[Amit Varma]: going to live a life of more curiosity and wonder or whatever, and then boom, the direction
[Amit Varma]: changes and that's fine.
[Amit Varma]: No, I think every day, you have to remind yourself to be mindful, remind yourself not
[Amit Varma]: to take stuff for granted, to notice the things that you've sort of normalized.
[Amit Varma]: In my case, I do notice the many ways in which you're so incredibly lucky for doing what
[Amit Varma]: you do or living the kind of life you live, and I think it's important to have that sense
[Amit Varma]: of like, Jesus Christ, I'm so lucky, right, despite which I'm known as an excessively
[Amit Varma]: pessimistic person, because of course, the country is going to hell and we're all going
[Amit Varma]: to die soon, but soon in geological terms.
[Amit Varma]: But I'll say one thing, I don't even know if it's a counterpoint.
[Amit Varma]: But perhaps I'm addressing a worry that you have is that you mentioned about how something
[Amit Varma]: new will emerge, and we'll find a way to mess it up.
[Amit Varma]: And I think this time, we won't mess it up.
[Amit Varma]: Because I think the direction that worry is going in is that there is a culture and that
[Amit Varma]: culture becomes stayed and mainstream and whatever, and then a counterculture emerges
[Amit Varma]: and the counterculture is really cool.
[Amit Varma]: But then it gets co-opted and it gets messed up.
[Amit Varma]: And then you have another counterculture and it's a cycle.
[Amit Varma]: But I don't think that's what's happening here.
[Amit Varma]: I think what's happening here is this fundamental, permanent shift towards decentralization in
[Amit Varma]: every way, right, in the sense that, just to take the media as an example, there was
[Amit Varma]: a mainstream in the 1990s, you had a broad consensus on the truth, the means of production
[Amit Varma]: were not open to creators, creators couldn't connect with their audiences, creators couldn't
[Amit Varma]: monetize their audiences directly.
[Amit Varma]: They had to go via the platforms who would sell eyeballs, get advertising, and a small
[Amit Varma]: chunk of that would reach creators.
[Amit Varma]: And I think all that has changed and it's changed for good, in the sense that I now
[Amit Varma]: have the means of production in my hand, I can write something and publish it today,
[Amit Varma]: I can put out this podcast today as I will, you know, this is I own this, this is not
[Amit Varma]: for any platform, it's available everywhere, and it's free, right, I can make anything
[Amit Varma]: in the audiovisual form that I want to and put it on YouTube or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that is not going to change the means of production are with you forever,
[Amit Varma]: the means of distribution are accessible to you forever, there might be, I think worries
[Amit Varma]: that will get addressed with times that some video creators may feel that they are too
[Amit Varma]: dependent on the algorithms of the big platforms like YouTube or whatever, and they might have
[Amit Varma]: to cater to that to get noticed.
[Amit Varma]: But many creators don't even give a damn about that they're just putting their work out and
[Amit Varma]: they're getting their audiences.
[Amit Varma]: So in that sense, I don't think we'll mess it up.
[Amit Varma]: I think yes, there will be a percentage of creators who are doing cutting edge work today
[Amit Varma]: and who are being disruptive, who might be co opted and who might become part of that
[Amit Varma]: mainstream game.
[Amit Varma]: But overall, we're not going to mess it up.
[Amit Varma]: Because unless a human species dies, dies out, which will happen eventually, given the
[Amit Varma]: law of extremely large numbers is inevitable.
[Amit Varma]: But apart from that, I think that this is an irrevocable change.
[Amit Varma]: And that's why it feels creators like me and Roshan and many of the creators I've spoken
[Amit Varma]: to on my podcast, with incredible optimism about at least this, that they can't take
[Amit Varma]: this away.
[Guest]: I'm going to hold my skepticism in check.
[Guest]: I would like to believe I guess, okay, what I'm skeptical about is not that this revolution
[Guest]: isn't happening.
[Guest]: I see it happening.
[Guest]: And I think it's well overdue.
[Guest]: It was what part of the early promise of the net was about.
[Guest]: It just that at that time, we didn't have all the tools and all of that.
[Guest]: I guess my two concerns after having been an early, you know, the web will be used for
[Guest]: good evangelist and it's wonderful to connect people and on Twitter, all we're going to
[Guest]: do is flood relief and reach out to each other and get books to libraries and all that good
[Guest]: stuff.
[Guest]: I think I have a healthy respect now for the speed of darkness as well, you know.
[Guest]: So unconsciously, when we say creators, we're thinking of what we consider not even moral,
[Guest]: I'm not even going there, but what we consider benevolent, beneficial creativity, right?
[Guest]: And I guess I'm looking at AI and where that's headed and how that is going to mess up a
[Guest]: certain amount of this.
[Guest]: And I'm a little nervous about where these tools could go in the hands of well-organized
[Guest]: hate industries.
[Guest]: We've seen just little flickers of that, right?
[Guest]: In the power of certain kinds of propaganda films, there was a fabulous Twitter thread,
[Guest]: you know, Twitter, the source of good is when it's evil, by a Russian journalist writing
[Guest]: about how before this moment happened, you know, before Putin's war, for decades and
[Guest]: decades, Russian publishing has been overrun by these small books that are jingoistic and
[Guest]: have the worst of nationalistic, both the demonizing and the hero making, you know?
[Guest]: So I guess that's what I'm getting at, you know, the power of something like this to
[Guest]: be used to create dark, grim alternate realities is also something that I would keep a little
[Amit Varma]: and I share your pessimism about politics.
[Amit Varma]: And this is really in the realm of politics, the industry of hate and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And it's no doubt true that there is authoritarianism and polarization and all of those things are
[Amit Varma]: happening and the technology plays a huge part in that.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm not disputing that.
[Amit Varma]: But just in the narrow context of the creator economy, I think the cat's out of the bag.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that, you know, you can't mainstream all of it again.
[Amit Varma]: You're not going to ever reach the situation where someone like me can't put out the kind
[Amit Varma]: of work I want to put out, you know?
[Amit Varma]: I think I'm in the space and creators everywhere are in that space where they can do the kind
[Amit Varma]: of work they want and get it out there.
[Amit Varma]: And that little thing you can't turn back.
[Guest]: It is...
[Guest]: You see, that's not a little thing, you know, there I'm in agreement.
[Guest]: And the other thing that has also become earlier the argument used to be that if you're an
[Guest]: independent creator, somebody who's with a legacy publisher is somehow better than you
[Guest]: because they've had access to the best editors in the business and all of that.
[Guest]: And that has also changed.
[Guest]: If you really want to teach yourself how to be edited properly, you can organize those
[Guest]: skills for yourself.
[Guest]: You can take a workshop, you can practice a craft on your own, or you can hire an editor.
[Amit Varma]: Or you can do the art of clear writing by Amit Verma.
[Guest]: Yeah, but I see what I like about this scenario is that it's also coming up at a time when
[Guest]: you have, you know, this youth explosion in India.
[Guest]: And of course, when you have so many people out there clustering around, they can either
[Guest]: that energy can either be turned to really, really vicious purposes, you know, towards
[Guest]: common hate and towards mobs and all of that, which is what we've seen happening out here.
[Guest]: But there is a better pathway.
[Guest]: And that's what you're seeing, you know, this is a generation that's already used to a certain
[Guest]: amount of independence.
[Guest]: And that, you know, as great as liberalization was for India, that boom in businesses, and
[Guest]: that sudden explosion of cities like Delhi into huge megalopolises, if you consider that
[Guest]: a good thing, you know, and an energy.
[Guest]: What I remember about liberalization in the 1990s most was, again, an explosion of wild
[Guest]: creative energy, you know, for a while, it felt like Delhi was an exceptionally welcoming
[Guest]: city for anyone who had a multitude, I mean, one of a multitude of dreams, not just the
[Guest]: writing dream.
[Guest]: But if you wanted to be a graphic designer, if you wanted to be an artist, this was the
[Guest]: place to be young and starving in a Barsati in Lajpat Nagar, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: I came to Delhi in 94, after college, and after a few months, turned my butt and ran
[Amit Varma]: back all the way to Bombay, I wouldn't necessarily say it was such a welcoming city.
[Amit Varma]: But no, because I just found that at that time, and it's probably not true today, but
[Amit Varma]: at that time, Bombay was the only cosmopolitan city in India, in the sense it could, I just
[Amit Varma]: felt at home in Bombay from day one, which was not the case in Delhi.
[Guest]: Delhi is always a rough ride right at the start.
[Guest]: But in the same time period, there were a lot of other people who went through the turbulent
[Guest]: rapids and then found their feet in the city, it was a nourishing place.
[Guest]: I'm not so sure that it's as nourishing these days, you know, there's a sense of that creative
[Guest]: energy at least having fallen apart a little bit and the business side of the city being
[Guest]: strong, the building side of the city being strong, you know, but there isn't as much
[Guest]: of a glamour attached to wanting to be an artist or whatever.
[Guest]: It's become a lot more conformist in both Bombay and Delhi in some ways.
[Amit Varma]: I can't speak about Delhi, obviously, because I don't live here and I don't have that kind
[Amit Varma]: of knowledge.
[Amit Varma]: But I think that there would be many Delhi's.
[Amit Varma]: And perhaps there's a little bit of a selection, there might be a little bit of a selection
[Amit Varma]: bias in what you're saying in the sense that you could be thinking of your circles and
[Amit Varma]: the kind of people that you know, and what's happening there.
[Amit Varma]: Because even in Bombay, I have to warn myself about making easy generalizations about Bombay,
[Amit Varma]: because there are so many sort of niches and undergrounds and vibrant communities of creative
[Amit Varma]: people who are all over the place, who I didn't know till a while back, but then suddenly
[Amit Varma]: you see them and you realize this is also there.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm wary about, I mean, I'm not saying you're doing that, but I'm just wary about
[Amit Varma]: generalizations because what I do see in the creator economy is that there is just tremendous
[Amit Varma]: energy and the greatest tragedy of all for me, where politics hurt the creator economy
[Amit Varma]: was TikTok being banned.
[Amit Varma]: And I rant and rave about this because...
[Guest]: That's actually one of the things I was coming to.
[Guest]: It's not that I don't see a lack of creative potential in Delhi, let's put it that way.
[Guest]: But compared to, and liberalization had its own, you know, ups and downs or whatever.
[Guest]: I will just say that the 2000s seem to be more welcoming to the younger generation.
[Guest]: Now that energy is there, I see fewer outlets though, you know, and that always puts upon
[Guest]: a generation the burden of going out and making their own spaces.
[Guest]: So I would say that everything out there is poised and set up to thrive.
[Guest]: Politically speaking, it's not just a question of, you know, which party's in charge, but
[Guest]: I think in general, it hasn't been a priority out here to make your cities into great creative
[Guest]: bastions.
[Guest]: Does that make sense?
[Guest]: And again, I'm not talking about things like, you know, museums and stuff like that.
[Guest]: It's just that with the ebb and flow of the city, there was a point at which even the
[Guest]: outside spaces seemed to have something to them, you know, a little welcomingness.
[Guest]: In order to create and to be a thriving creative community, you also have to be open to mingling
[Guest]: and moving past certain barriers and all of that.
[Guest]: And I find that happening much more online than offline.
[Guest]: Again, you know, we're walking back into these arguments are large and gigantic, but I think
[Guest]: what both of us are seeing, what I see from the world of legacy publishing and legacy
[Guest]: media is a certain level of fatigue.
[Guest]: You know, certain institutions, including some of the ones where I work in, where my
[Guest]: work comes out, are as professional and as thorough and as ever, and bless them for being
[Guest]: around.
[Guest]: But increasingly, you sense that legacy publishing and legacy media, which used to be take up
[Guest]: the entire space, is now one corner of that space, right?
[Amit Varma]: I'll think carefully about your words and process them with time.
[Amit Varma]: But I'm reminded of our beloved Prime Minister, dear leader, Modiji, who was once asked about
[Amit Varma]: Do you remember there was this famous gathering of children to ask him questions in an auditorium?
[Amit Varma]: And one of them, I think, asked him about climate change.
[Amit Varma]: And he was trying to say, ki dekhe, mausam nahi badla hai, hum badle hai.
[Amit Varma]: So anyway, from talking about legacy publishing, let's talk about legacy person, which is,
[Amit Varma]: let's kind of talk about your childhood now.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, where were you born?
[Amit Varma]: And what were your early years like?
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about that.
[Guest]: I was born in Kolkata.
[Guest]: And part of the mythology, because one doesn't remember one's own birth in the early few
[Guest]: months.
[Guest]: But in my mind, I think all of that is fused with memories of Bangladesh coming into being.
[Guest]: And the earliest memories I have are by and large of very happy things, you know, books,
[Guest]: houses that were built practically of books, running around and playing in gardens.
[Guest]: And because both my parents and my grandmother in Kolkata were exceptionally hospitable people,
[Guest]: there was, we were used to a house that where the doors were open, where there was always
[Guest]: an extra space at the table, and where people were welcome to come and just crash.
[Guest]: And in retrospect, I think it gave me tremendous exposure to a life outside of just the family.
[Guest]: You know, otherwise, we get caught up very strongly in our own family histories and all
[Guest]: of that.
[Guest]: And another thing I didn't realize was, we mentioned earlier, that I felt lucky to be
[Guest]: belong to a family where so many people were readers.
[Guest]: But of my grandmothers, one of them was a woman who had studied Sanskrit, and loved
[Guest]: reading Mills and Boones.
[Guest]: So you were introduced right from the start to the idea that reading could be wide and
[Guest]: eclectic and didn't have to be either solemn or frivolous all the time, there was a huge
[Guest]: spectrum, a kind of keyboard in between.
[Guest]: And my father's mother, Takuma, used to write poems in Bengali.
[Guest]: And that brought in a certain, you know, comfort with moving between languages as easily as
[Guest]: you move between the rooms of a household.
[Guest]: And I think a large part of my childhood was, we discussed this as well, it would be so
[Guest]: alien to this time, it wasn't structured, none of our childhoods were, there was the
[Guest]: broad and very loose structure of a school.
[Guest]: And then you come back, you do a little homework.
[Guest]: But in the absence of TV and smartphones, and all of that, we were thrown back on our
[Guest]: own inventiveness.
[Guest]: So the games that we played also came out of one's imagination.
[Guest]: And I grew up partly in a government colony in Delhi, at a time when being a government
[Guest]: officer was not seen as so much as a emblem of power.
[Guest]: You know, it was a kind of time when a secretary to the government of India would drive his
[Guest]: car around the neighborhood, picking up lowly deputy secretaries and very, very junior probationers
[Guest]: and ferry them all off.
[Guest]: And if he didn't do that, in fact, the lowly probationers would get on their cycles and
[Guest]: cycle off to work.
[Guest]: So being in the government was pretty humble.
[Guest]: And the India of that time, the 1970s and the 80s was both quieter and smaller.
[Guest]: It still rippled with a current of political tension all through.
[Guest]: But it was very much a nation making itself with the memory of Gandhi, Ambedkar, and,
[Guest]: you know, all of the heroes of the freedom movement very much alive.
[Guest]: That I think has changed over time.
[Guest]: Most of my childhood was spent, I think, just being extraordinarily lucky in every possible
[Guest]: way.
[Guest]: We had a lot of adventures.
[Guest]: We were allowed as a family to accompany my father on his tours, so long as he paid for
[Guest]: us separately, which he was very punctilious about.
[Guest]: And as a result, my first sense of travel was not, you know, a tour, was not you go
[Guest]: to a hill station.
[Guest]: It was literally of just going across the country and right from the start seeing that
[Guest]: enormous variation.
[Guest]: I think part of my memory of India as an essentially kind and open country, though, also comes
[Guest]: from that time.
[Guest]: Something that I found a little disconcerting on my first visit to Europe, where for all
[Guest]: the beauty of the place, you don't stop on the street and ask for directions and have
[Guest]: that immediately turned into a long and rambling conversation and an invitation to come home,
[Guest]: or at least to have a cup of tea together.
[Guest]: And for all that, we talk often of the direction that the country is going in today, our fears
[Guest]: for the future, our fears for democracy.
[Guest]: But when I look back at that time, it doesn't seem romanticized to say that there's an openness
[Guest]: that's also part of the Indian spirit.
[Guest]: And that is felt and experienced.
[Guest]: You know, I don't want to romanticize villages and cities.
[Guest]: Part of the research that I did for Black River, among other things, just showed me
[Guest]: that almost all of our spaces are unselfconsciously segregated, either by class, often by community,
[Guest]: usually by caste, right?
[Guest]: And that's what we grew up in.
[Guest]: That's the norm that we're used to.
[Guest]: But cutting against that, one of the good things about being part of a government colony
[Guest]: is that while in that era, certainly caste was not porous, you know, I think the majority
[Guest]: of people who were in government colonies at that time were probably upper caste or
[Guest]: at least privileged caste in some way or the other.
[Guest]: But it was a first introduction to the melting pot aspect of India.
[Guest]: And as much as we say, hey, listen, don't go back into nostalgic fantasies about the
[Guest]: secular past, I think we're using the wrong word out there.
[Guest]: There is an extraordinary diversity in this country.
[Guest]: And that was part of my memories from the get-go.
[Guest]: In Calcutta, it wasn't that we were just listening to Bengali and English.
[Guest]: There were also Marwari friends.
[Guest]: There were friends from the Armenian, the very small but extremely vibrant Armenian
[Guest]: and Parsi communities.
[Guest]: English itself divided into several categories.
[Guest]: There was the beauty of Anglo-Indian English, which I think is a little close to the Bombay
[Guest]: variants and all of that.
[Guest]: And in Delhi, I remember being struck by the fact that there was no one Hindi.
[Guest]: We grew up to a certain extent, assimilating newsreader, All India Radio, you know, Hindi
[Guest]: and Doordarshan News Hindi.
[Guest]: But the other stream was also coming off Bombay through Amitabh Bachchan's movies and Rajesh
[Guest]: Khanna's movies.
[Guest]: And then there was the many, many Hindis that you'd pick up across the city.
[Guest]: Old Delhi had its own slightly courtly, a little Lucknowi, a little Allahabadi Hindi.
[Guest]: And the migrant Hindi of the streets was coming straight in from Bihar.
[Guest]: I could hear my own state Bengal also in the voices of people out there.
[Guest]: So you grew up accustomed, I think, to many tongues ringing in your ears.
[Guest]: I didn't have a very happy time in the first school that I was in, Noretto Convent.
[Guest]: I made a lot of friends, as is the Roy habit.
[Guest]: But it was a slightly austere, you know, you must go abide by the rules.
[Guest]: And Kiran Desai's got a little section in Inheritance of Loss about what it's like to
[Guest]: be a child suddenly realising that some adults are cruel, and they're cruel just because
[Guest]: they can be and they have that kind of power over you.
[Guest]: But my life really opened up when I went to La Martiniere.
[Guest]: Can I just digress a second here to talk about how much we owe our first teachers, whether
[Guest]: they're at the workplace or whether they're in school.
[Guest]: So we had some extraordinary teachers.
[Guest]: There was Doita Dutta, who became India's first mastermind and we all very chuffed that,
[Guest]: you know, a woman had picked up that quiz title.
[Guest]: Subsequently related to you by marriage as well.
[Guest]: Yes, my husband's cousin.
[Guest]: And Indra Sen Gupta, who taught us all about the Constitution, and maybe some of my love
[Guest]: for the Constitution comes from those early lessons.
[Guest]: And Sumita D, who was our English teacher, brought the Grapes of Wrath, which was the
[Guest]: text that we were studying that year in class 11, alive in this classroom in Calcutta in
[Guest]: a way where suddenly there was a sense of connection, you know, Steinbeck's molten anger
[Guest]: over the kind of waste that was happening, the squeezing of the migrants into smaller
[Guest]: and smaller spaces, the relentlessness of keeping them on the road.
[Guest]: What does that remind you of?
[Guest]: What did we go through last year?
[Guest]: Those early lessons just brought home to me, we've talked so much about the joy of reading,
[Guest]: the joy of writing, the uses of it.
[Guest]: But something I want to say, literature is not an abstraction.
[Guest]: You know, it's not just a frill added to life.
[Guest]: It is often something that does more than just witness or document.
[Guest]: It is really a living thing in itself.
[Guest]: And Steinbeck's book, I was reading that at the same time that I was reading, I just about
[Guest]: started reading in Bengali again after years of absence.
[Guest]: And I was reading Vibhuti Bhushan's Pother Panchali and Tagore's Gora at the same time.
[Guest]: And it came to me that there's an unselfconscious political novel.
[Guest]: We think of the political novel today in very limited ways in India.
[Guest]: It's a novel that makes a statement.
[Guest]: It's a novel that's in effect, I don't want to diminish people's enthusiasm for writing
[Guest]: this.
[Guest]: I don't want to be unkind.
[Guest]: But a novel is not an editorial, right?
[Guest]: It is much more than that.
[Guest]: What Tagore was doing, what Vibhuti was doing in his story of Upu coming out of a very poor
[Guest]: village and at that he had a Brahmin protagonist, but a Brahmin protagonist who was encountering
[Guest]: the city for the first time and trying to find his place in it and sometimes dealing
[Guest]: with an incredible loneliness of the soul and the spirit and sometimes just riveted
[Guest]: to the promise of the city.
[Guest]: It's such a contemporary book in that sense.
[Guest]: And Tagore went straight into this question of identity with Gora.
[Guest]: You know, I don't know whether you've read the novel.
[Guest]: It was a very popular Bengali serial at one time.
[Guest]: And Tagore just dealt with the dynama of a man who believes that he is a nationalist,
[Guest]: that the country should be left to only a certain kind of persons.
[Guest]: And then he realizes that the secret of his birth makes him the outsider that he's always
[Guest]: been reeling against in part.
[Guest]: I'm summarizing terribly, but he wasn't afraid to go into these big questions.
[Guest]: His novels are political statements in the sense that the word politics is intricately
[Guest]: involved with the life of the people, right?
[Guest]: And I think writers like Tagore, filmmakers like Shatrujit Ray, I'm speaking only of my
[Guest]: part of the country now, but I'm also thinking of Govind Nihalani, I'm thinking of the many
[Guest]: films that Om Puri acted in.
[Guest]: That was the water that we were swimming in, you see.
[Guest]: It was, if it was intellectual, then I think it was unselfconsciously intellectual.
[Guest]: And those big ideas were also mass available in a way that I think has changed a little
[Guest]: bit over time.
[Guest]: I went straight from, I went to Stephens for English literature and I remember the only
[Guest]: way that I could justify that choice because there wasn't going to be a job at the end
[Guest]: of it, was just being aware that I was happy because I was following my heart.
[Guest]: And then being a little dismayed because following my heart turned out to mean a lot of Dryden
[Guest]: and Chaucer, and at first I really struggled with that.
[Guest]: We were reading these texts in a vacuum.
[Guest]: Even though we had some incredibly gifted teachers, it took professors like Arjun Mahe
[Guest]: and Vikey Sharma, who passed away in my third year out there, to draw the map of connections
[Guest]: and to let you know that Shakespeare was, in a sense, Kalidasa's blood brother.
[Guest]: That Chaucer sitting at his inn, spinning his stories, and you can make a parallel in
[Guest]: a different way with Krishna Subti collecting all of life around her in Chandni Chowk.
[Guest]: And I'm not sure that any of the classical education did much for me, but a lot of my
[Guest]: Stephen's education happened actually on the lawns of Hindu College and wandering around
[Guest]: to other parts of Delhi University, witnessing in embryo a lot of the debates that would
[Guest]: start to rock India.
[Guest]: The Mandal agitation happened in the final year of our college.
[Guest]: And I think a certain percentage of the university was automatically and self-righteously against
[Guest]: reservations.
[Guest]: It took a lot for people to turn around and look at the composition of their own colleges
[Guest]: and say, aren't we all upper caste here?
[Guest]: And how did that happen?
[Guest]: And isn't there something that is owed to people who did not have everything that we
[Guest]: take so casually for granted, whether that is a physical thing like the presence of books
[Guest]: in the house or access to English or good education, or whether that is something a
[Guest]: little more intangible or confidence, the fact that your surname is its own passport or even
[Guest]: if it doesn't open doors for you, it doesn't close doors in your face.
[Guest]: And I don't think that was an easy reckoning for most people because we believe so strongly
[Guest]: in the myth of our own merit.
[Guest]: You know, we believe that because we have worked hard, we do not see that other people
[Guest]: not even allowed to step into the zone where you can start working hard.
[Guest]: So all of that swirl was happening.
[Guest]: I joined the business standard rather than do a PhD.
[Guest]: The truth to tell, I was at MA for my JNU and I had this marvellous professor Meenakshi
[Guest]: Mukherjee who was a translator and a critic and a professor, very much one of those whose
[Guest]: engagement with writing came from an active immersion in literature as it is practiced.
[Guest]: And she kept an open curious mind right to the end, had a rousing punch up with Vikram
[Guest]: Chandra on the subject of authenticity and what is an authentic Indian writer.
[Guest]: And even when she lost an argument or was in the wrong, I think it was the joy of getting
[Guest]: into the ring that stays with me.
[Guest]: And at some point, I think she gently pointed out to me that doing a PhD, which is the track
[Guest]: that I was on.
[Guest]: Also, in parenthesis, we Indians are so much about life tracks, right?
[Guest]: You have to be doctor, lawyer, engineer, IAS.
[Guest]: And if you're a writer, then you're carefully steered towards BA in India, MA abroad and
[Guest]: PhD America, you know.
[Guest]: And then she drew my attention to the content of what I was going to study.
[Guest]: And that was literary theory of the most high flown there is the unkind, which I have to
[Guest]: admit that I was completely unsuited to.
[Guest]: And she said, why do you want to study further with English?
[Guest]: And I think for the first time in my life, I said, because I love the literature of it.
[Guest]: And I love the fact that most translation happens in English.
[Guest]: So it's not just English, it opens up all of the languages of the world to me.
[Guest]: And someday I want to write my own books.
[Guest]: And I think it was the first time I'd said that aloud and I was a little shocked by this
[Guest]: unseemly impractical ambition.
[Guest]: And she said, whatever else you do, don't do a PhD, go out and work for a bit.
[Guest]: Try your hand at being a journalist or in publishing or something, get a practical sense
[Guest]: of life.
[Guest]: But don't kill yourself by disappearing down the wonderful, but for me, perhaps not nourishing
[Guest]: fields of Gayatri Spivak and Homi Bhabha and the rest of it.
[Guest]: And so I tried out for every job that I could find.
[Guest]: I briefly taught at nursery school as a teacher.
[Guest]: I was a paralegal and I worked on the early version of Durex, which is what became the
[Guest]: Lexis database.
[Guest]: And I was absorbed in the different, we've talked about this, I think, as friends once
[Guest]: or twice.
[Guest]: But I was just fascinated by the thought that crime changes according to the part of the
[Guest]: country that you come from.
[Guest]: And in a sense, you know, we're conformist.
[Guest]: In one part of the country, you have to push people down wells in order to kill them.
[Guest]: And in the other, it's a little bit of a social solacism.
[Guest]: If you murder somebody using anything else but a gandasa or an axe, you're not really
[Guest]: supposed to pick up a country made pistol.
[Guest]: And Bengal was given to poisonings, for example, UP, parts of it favoured the country made
[Guest]: pistol, which was very sporting because that had an equal chance of blowing up in the hand
[Guest]: of the would-be murderer and, you know, taking him down.
[Guest]: And there were places where you simply chop people into pieces, inevitably burying a body
[Guest]: in your own backyard, thereby giving the police a chance to put you behind bars.
[Guest]: But it all had the sense of being extremely ritualistic.
[Guest]: I was deeply fascinated and then, for reasons known only to themselves, business standard
[Guest]: employed me.
[Guest]: And I think that was such, I was so lucky in retrospect, not just because between people
[Guest]: like TN9 and Tony Joseph, Pratik Kanjilal, Kanika Dutta, some of my editors out there,
[Guest]: there were people who taught me skill, yes, and the craft of reporting and the whole thing
[Guest]: of go back and double-check a source.
[Guest]: From Tony, I learned something invaluable, which is that the most articulate person in
[Guest]: a room is not necessarily the person who knows the most.
[Guest]: Sometimes it's the quiet people standing around whom you really need to interview.
[Guest]: Tony also taught me about multiple perspectives, you know, never take anything for granted,
[Guest]: just go back and check and recheck and all of that.
[Guest]: And because I was obviously useless at the economics and finance side of things, and
[Guest]: I was never going to make a political journalist, I was put on the arts beat.
[Guest]: It seems extraordinary because we give so much space over to so many things.
[Guest]: But in those days, the art section was about a 10-page, 12-page section, you know, and
[Guest]: about three of those pages were on the arts directly.
[Guest]: So my job was utterly delightful.
[Guest]: It was to go out and meet people in this new India of the then early 1990s, who were teaching
[Guest]: themselves an idiom that was both Indian and international.
[Guest]: And the other part of the job, which I loved so much, was to go down to the publishing
[Guest]: houses, which were in those days, all in a row in Daryaganj, in the middle of those crowded
[Guest]: Delhi streets with bazaars that had gone back to literally the 17th or 14th century around
[Guest]: them, and pick up books that were suitable for review or extract.
[Guest]: I was in absolute heaven, but it was only later that I realized that I'd lucked into
[Guest]: an organization that also prized integrity.
[Guest]: These sound like such old-fashioned things, don't they?
[Guest]: Like I said, legacy person.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: You have to stop me when I'm running on and on though.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, please.
[Amit Varma]: It's delightful.
[Amit Varma]: I feel like having a conversation with you is like being a leaf on a river and you don't
[Amit Varma]: know where you're going and the waves are coming from here and there and you're just
[Amit Varma]: flowing.
[Amit Varma]: But it's great fun.
[Amit Varma]: I'm the happiest leaf ever.
[Amit Varma]: So do continue.
[Guest]: I'm going to repeat that, just stop me anytime that I start overflowing the banks or whatever.
[Guest]: But it was a great introduction to the city as well.
[Guest]: And if you want to know what Delhi was like at that time, this was the early 90s.
[Guest]: We were just beginning to feel the beat and the pulse of liberalization and most of that
[Guest]: was felt in the dismantling of the License Raj that held people back so terribly.
[Guest]: I see a little bit of a parallel to that now.
[Guest]: We were talking about the creative economy earlier.
[Guest]: And some of the barriers in place, whether it's a tax barrier or whether it's just the
[Guest]: absence of resources that help somebody who doesn't already have a network of power and
[Guest]: influence to join in, you know.
[Guest]: Some of those to see those come down at that time and to see the breath of a fresh energy.
[Guest]: Delhi's a city built around a cluster of small and ancient villages.
[Guest]: And in that time, Bina Rahmani changed the landscape entirely by taking over the house
[Guest]: cars village and setting up restaurants out there.
[Guest]: And of course, there was a lot of Delhiwala's ooing and aahing over the cuteness of seeing
[Guest]: cows and buffaloes as they went off for expensive dinners facing the house car snake.
[Guest]: But I think she actually started something that allowed us to knit our past and our hopeful
[Guest]: future together.
[Guest]: Delhi was a very anxious city.
[Guest]: You know, if you look at it from a psychic point of view, I think it was always comparing
[Guest]: itself either to the slick sophistication of Bombay or it was hoping someday to be like
[Guest]: a London or New York, but aware that it was lagging behind.
[Guest]: And it takes some time to understand that you're sitting in a century, you know, you're
[Guest]: living in a city that is literally built on the centuries.
[Guest]: When I walk around the city today, sometimes it seems populated with writers either living
[Guest]: or by the ghosts of writers.
[Guest]: You know, across the road, there's Amir Khosrow, down the road from my house, there's Rahim
[Guest]: Khan of the Dohas.
[Guest]: And in more contemporary terms in Sujan Singh Park, there's Khushwant Singh, across the
[Guest]: river in Mayur Vihar, there's a school of younger writers who cut their teeth in places
[Guest]: like Lajpat Nagar or Paharganj or whatever it is.
[Guest]: And when you live in a city like that, it's not about whether writing is doing well, which
[Guest]: seems to be sometimes the only question we're asking of writing, you know, that anxiety
[Guest]: of performance.
[Guest]: It's a city that just breeds stories under the roughness, under the aggression.
[Guest]: And the aggression is a serious thing.
[Guest]: And I think I just jumped into that life.
[Guest]: Even as a newly married woman, my experience of the city was tremendous independence.
[Guest]: None of us could afford fancy houses and we all lived clustered in versatis or in the
[Guest]: first floor of a tumbling bungalow, you know, that kind of thing.
[Guest]: And we all ate khichdi towards the end of the month when the budget was running out.
[Guest]: And we were all incredibly happy.
[Guest]: And what we talked about was books and film and music.
[Guest]: And again, in our homes, what flowed was multiple languages, multiple ways of seeing.
[Guest]: At some point, the Hindi and the English worlds of the city became a little segregated, you
[Guest]: know.
[Guest]: The English book launches happened at fancy five star hotels.
[Guest]: And we lost something that used to be an organic connection between the Hindi, Urdu, English
[Guest]: worlds, Punjabi as well.
[Guest]: These four languages used to move in and out of each other's lives.
[Guest]: I think when I started off as a young journalist, if you were on the arts beat, you were expected
[Guest]: to be bilingual.
[Guest]: It wasn't said, it wasn't stated upfront.
[Guest]: But it was assumed that if you were Indian, you would have at least one other language
[Guest]: at your command.
[Guest]: And I don't want to lecture people at all, because I am not truly, I write only in English.
[Guest]: I don't write in Bengali, because I don't live in Calcutta.
[Guest]: And I feel very strongly that it's best to write in a language that you're surrounded
[Guest]: by.
[Guest]: I don't write in Hindi because there's a great love for that language, but I really don't
[Guest]: have the literary heft to even attempt that.
[Guest]: But I think our lives are poorer for living in only one language when we have so much
[Guest]: choice and when we are surrounded by so much.
[Guest]: Gitanjali Shree said this recently with Tomb of Sand, when she won the International Booker.
[Guest]: And her first thing was not a triumphalism about the language that she writes in, which
[Guest]: is Hindi, but just a reminder that we are lucky in a way that maybe we don't see so
[Guest]: easily.
[Guest]: We live in a country where there are a thousand streams of literatures, languages, some big,
[Guest]: some limited to just 100 speakers or so.
[Guest]: But you know, being aware of that stream or living only in English is also not the best
[Amit Varma]: choice you could make.
[Amit Varma]: So many strands to pick up on, or should I say many tributaries to go down on, as you've
[Amit Varma]: kind of made your path.
[Amit Varma]: So here's the first of them.
[Amit Varma]: You know, when one of the subjects that I think about more and more is how are we shaped,
[Amit Varma]: how are we shaped as people in all the ways that we are shaped.
[Amit Varma]: And when I look back on myself as a young man, I realized that the young me 25 years
[Amit Varma]: ago was shaped in many ways that I now realize in hindsight by, for example, by just my home,
[Amit Varma]: by my parents.
[Amit Varma]: I think I, from my mother, I got a sense of social arrogance.
[Amit Varma]: From my father, I got a sense of intellectual arrogance, and I got good things from them
[Amit Varma]: also like the love of reading and the respect for the arts and all of that, you know.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, once you reflect on yourself and you become conscious of these things,
[Amit Varma]: and you can begin to change and eliminate them.
[Amit Varma]: But it's interesting to think, you know, how you became what you became.
[Amit Varma]: And when I was reading your book, you had this part where you were talking about the
[Amit Varma]: Bengali obsession for intellectualism, as it were, you referred to an Amitav Ghosh essay
[Amit Varma]: where he wrote about the bong obsession with the Nobel Prize.
[Amit Varma]: And there's a certain bongness, certainly in my upbringing, because my mother, of course,
[Amit Varma]: was Bengali.
[Amit Varma]: And my father was, although Punjabi born in Lahore, but basically from childhood just
[Amit Varma]: grew up in Calcutta, where he met my mother and all that.
[Amit Varma]: So culturally, completely Bengali and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And that set me to wondering that how much of these qualities, the sort of social arrogance,
[Amit Varma]: which partly, of course, came from the privilege of, you know, being located where we were,
[Amit Varma]: and the intellectual arrogance, how much of it perhaps was a partly Bengali heritage also?
[Amit Varma]: That's really a hard question to answer and almost a rhetorical one.
[Amit Varma]: But the question I pose to you is that, when you look back at the way that you were shaped,
[Amit Varma]: that what you became, you know, some of those connections are easy to draw.
[Amit Varma]: You were, of course, surrounded by books, it was that culture of reading.
[Amit Varma]: So of course, you would become a reader, you know, that comes from there.
[Amit Varma]: But what else, you know, what are the like, I often think that, you know, we use the term
[Amit Varma]: earlier in the conversation, mimetic desire, and I think there can also be mimetic personalities,
[Amit Varma]: that what we are is contingent on where we are located, and so much around us, and we
[Amit Varma]: don't realize to what extent that there is, we think that we are autonomous in the way
[Amit Varma]: that we shape ourselves, that I can be what I want to be.
[Amit Varma]: But often, it's not so simple.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you earlier referred to how different crimes in different places in the country,
[Amit Varma]: different kinds of crimes.
[Amit Varma]: And that got me to thinking that, in many ways, geography can be destiny as well, right?
[Amit Varma]: How we are shaped is just a combination of all of these things.
[Amit Varma]: So at one level, of course, there are the genes that you get.
[Amit Varma]: But as Steven Pinker said, you know, nature gives you knobs, nurture turns them.
[Amit Varma]: And so beyond what you are born as, you have all these influences around you.
[Amit Varma]: So just looking back on yourself, what do you think are those sort of influences which
[Amit Varma]: kind of shaped you that in a parallel universe, if they were not there, you might be a completely
[Amit Varma]: different person?
[Amit Varma]: And then, as a sort of a mirror image of that answer, what do you think is essential to
[Amit Varma]: you that even if you were born in a humble Tamil household or in Nigeria, that you would
[Amit Varma]: still be this?
[Amit Varma]: But you know, so it's sort of a rambling river like question itself, but...
[Guest]: It's a beautiful question.
[Guest]: It's a beautiful question because we're getting to something real rather than, you know, the
[Guest]: polite faces that we often put on in a formal conversation or an interview.
[Guest]: And I think I was aware early on that a lot of the Bengali sense of exceptionalism, some
[Guest]: of it was built on something that is really, really beautiful about Calcutta, Bankura,
[Guest]: a large part of Bengal, which is the genuine appreciation for life in all its forms and
[Guest]: for craft, not as a snobbish, you know, part of life or, you know, they worked so hard
[Guest]: on their dancing or their music or whatever, but as a beautiful thing to do with a human
[Guest]: life, you know.
[Guest]: That stream is very gentle and sometimes subsumed by the fact that Bengal often speaks, as Parimal
[Guest]: Bhattacharya reminds you in his book, his recent book, of Bengal as though all of Calcutta
[Guest]: is Bengal, and that's absolutely not true.
[Guest]: And there's a deep anxiety among Bengalis, which I'm probably going to get a lot of hate
[Guest]: mail over this at some point, about being irrelevant, about being left out, no longer,
[Guest]: you know, from the time that it stopped being the first city of empire, it's off to a side
[Guest]: Bengal likes to think of itself as revolutionary, but just to digress, one of those famous digressions
[Guest]: for a second, I put together a small collection from the Modern Review, which was a publication
[Guest]: that came out in 1907 and continued till 1950, capturing the years of the freedom struggle,
[Guest]: and it was run by my husband's grandfather, Ramananda Babu, Ramananda Chatterjee.
[Guest]: The Modern Review itself was an extremely eclectic magazine and it positioned itself
[Guest]: not as centrist, but as a magazine that would listen to the Congress, but not always fully
[Guest]: agree with them that had space for more than just that, you know, it was somewhere in between.
[Guest]: But it was not the only, it was a brilliant endeavor and all of that, but it was only
[Guest]: when I started to go into the history of little magazines, that you realize they're everywhere.
[Guest]: There isn't a region in India that hasn't had a strong intellectual literary cultural
[Guest]: tradition.
[Guest]: The whole sense of Bengal as more than the rest does need to be laid to rest, you know.
[Guest]: I don't think I have much patience with that intellectual arrogance either.
[Guest]: With my own family, I think when you come across family pride, you start to ask yourself
[Guest]: after a while what that pride is in.
[Guest]: One of our family members, my great-granduncle, was somebody who took an active part in the
[Guest]: freedom struggle and was quite a well-known figure in the years immediately after independence.
[Guest]: But when that story was told to me, sometimes it seemed that what was important about him
[Guest]: was that he was important.
[Guest]: When I went into that story, what I found incredibly touching was that like most Indians,
[Guest]: he was just one generation out of a village.
[Guest]: He was brought up in fairly humble circumstances.
[Guest]: His family was neither affluent nor powerful, but they had a kind of integrity, a wholeness
[Guest]: to them that they passed on to him.
[Guest]: In his relationship with the British before India was independence, he, like a lot of
[Guest]: the nationalists, we keep going back to them, he, like a lot of the nationalists, didn't
[Guest]: have an arrogance about him.
[Guest]: He just had a confidence.
[Guest]: I've often looked back at that and thought to myself, where did they have the confidence
[Guest]: from when they were told all along, when everything surrounding them said that they were second-class
[Guest]: citizens, that Indians were inferior, or that the real version of this, you should be grateful
[Guest]: to the British for all that they have done, and you are not fit to govern your own country.
[Guest]: And then to assert your own selfhood, that's the part where I feel a kind of associated
[Guest]: pride.
[Guest]: I find it very difficult to feel ancestral pride per se though, because in that case
[Guest]: you're taking credit for somebody else's achievements.
[Guest]: What I prize about my heritage is not the cocoon part of it.
[Guest]: I prize the fact that there were people in my family for many generations who went where
[Guest]: their curiosity led them.
[Guest]: And I also prize the people who were willing to be ordinary, you know.
[Guest]: But there are parts of your family that you step away from as well, and I don't want to
[Guest]: be hurtful to anyone who's listening, but it did take a certain amount of reckoning
[Guest]: to say that maybe it's best to put aside a certain belief that we have made it on our
[Guest]: own.
[Guest]: You know, if you are born into certain things because of an accident of birth and whatever
[Guest]: that is, that might be financial privilege, it is often in this country majoritarian privilege.
[Guest]: You have had it easier than others, and it takes away nothing from what you see as the
[Guest]: successes of your own life to just acknowledge that.
[Guest]: You don't have to, you know, cringe about it, but you do have to see that it was not
[Guest]: because of your efforts that you were born into a circumstance where you could, you know,
[Guest]: access a good education or whatever.
[Guest]: I think the one thing that was surprising about our lives though is because my grandfather
[Guest]: died the year I was born, my mother's father, I never knew him.
[Guest]: I only knew of him, he was a judge who loved the law.
[Guest]: I think we took it for granted that we were brought up by a matriarch, and it was only
[Guest]: years later when a cousin of mine pointed that out that I said, okay, maybe one of the
[Guest]: reasons why I think that women should be in control is partly because of this.
[Guest]: What is just me?
[Guest]: I think my stubbornness, actually, more than anything else.
[Guest]: You know, the rest of it, if you peel away the privileges, would I have been a reader,
[Guest]: would I have been a writer?
[Guest]: I really don't know.
[Guest]: I really don't think so.
[Guest]: If I'd been married off and I was 16 or 17 or deprived of education, maybe I would have
[Guest]: thought that that was the right part.
[Guest]: Where I find myself on the shakiest ground is actually with some of the principles that
[Guest]: I feel so deeply, you know, the belief in democracy, the love of a nation that is a
[Guest]: diverse nation that has space for everybody equally.
[Guest]: And I honestly cannot tell, this is such a terrible confession to make, but it's a very
[Guest]: honest confession.
[Guest]: If I'd been brought up in a family that thought it was okay and natural to be bigoted, to
[Guest]: discriminate against whoever else, whoever else was not like you, you know, non-Hindus,
[Guest]: Muslims, anyone else, really, there's a shifting state always to that, women who read too much.
[Guest]: Would I have just imbibed that water?
[Guest]: Would I have not questioned it?
[Guest]: Something that Samit Basu, who was again a Delhi writer, says, and I think it's in The
[Guest]: City Inside or he said it in an interview.
[Guest]: He pointed out that no matter how independent and free we all think we are, it is surprising
[Guest]: and illuminating that so many of us take on the professions prescribed to us by our caste
[Guest]: identities, you know.
[Guest]: So a certain kind of, it's not to do with Bengali-ness anymore, but we instinctively,
[Guest]: you know, gravitate to this person is an accountant or that person is a teacher, not realizing
[Guest]: that it is the ancient shadow of caste somehow making itself felt.
[Guest]: So maybe we have a little less agency out here.
[Guest]: The part of me that is completely my own aside from the stubbornness, I think no matter what
[Guest]: I would have been creative.
[Guest]: And by creative, I don't mean that shallowly.
[Guest]: I mean that I think most humans are born into a sense of play, which is the first foundation
[Guest]: for creativity, a sense of questioning, which may be rapidly shut down, but it's there.
[Guest]: And a sense of wonder, those three things, okay.
[Guest]: And I think there's something in me that just refuses to roll over and die, no matter what
[Guest]: other minor challenges I've gone through, whatever it is.
[Guest]: I mean, in my childhood, for example, there was one person, a much, much older, not my
[Guest]: father or uncles or brothers, but somebody who was an older relative, who was extraordinarily
[Guest]: abusive when I was about eight, and the period from eight to 12 was darkened by that abuse.
[Guest]: And the shadow of that abuse also took me a long, long while to work through in my twenties
[Guest]: and thirties.
[Guest]: I don't mean this, again, to be overgrateful, but at different times in my life, particularly
[Guest]: when I was a reporter on The Gender Beat, and I met a lot of women who were traumatized
[Guest]: for similar reasons or who were in either facing domestic violence or facing the big
[Guest]: me too that we don't have the space for, which is the number of people who are abused as
[Guest]: agricultural laborers or as factory workers.
[Guest]: And there's a prohibition against seeking help.
[Guest]: And there is no availability of the resources that you need.
[Guest]: And I always had the choice to find the help that I needed, and to use creative ways to
[Guest]: move through whatever experiences had been distressing, you see.
[Amit Varma]: So here's my next question, which picks up from a couple of the things that you sort
[Amit Varma]: of mentioned, including where we just ended.
[Amit Varma]: There's this lovely passage about your Didima in your book, where you write, you could trace
[Amit Varma]: a historical development of women's romances by studying the gradual shift from outback
[Amit Varma]: love and doctor and nurse romances through the Greek millionaire and Italian count phase
[Amit Varma]: up to the modern phenomenon of soft core erotica and doctor-doctor romances.
[Amit Varma]: Didima disapproved of the erotica on the Umberto Eco principle that porn got in the way of
[Amit Varma]: a good story.
[Amit Varma]: But she liked the egalitarianism of doctors dating rather than doctors hitting on nurses.
[Amit Varma]: In his office and his bedroom, my uncle maintained an eclectic collection of paperbacks on subjects
[Amit Varma]: as varied as Tibetan Buddhism, physics via the dancing bully masters, classical music
[Amit Varma]: and jazz, and his passion architecture, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And what sort of struck me here was how their reading is kind of different, right?
[Amit Varma]: And I was recently in Chandigarh, my dad had died last year.
[Amit Varma]: So we were clearing away his house and just looking at the last remnants and seeing what
[Amit Varma]: we wanted and what we didn't want.
[Amit Varma]: And I came across a lot of letters, which I have kept from my mother to my father, none
[Amit Varma]: the other way around, but letters from my mom to my dad all the way from the 1980s onwards.
[Amit Varma]: And they were very interesting, because one of the things I realized was that all through
[Amit Varma]: their marriage, they were desperately lonely people, right?
[Amit Varma]: And it was a sort of they were separately lonely, and it was the marriage was a kind
[Amit Varma]: of mutual loneliness.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense, it was not something either of them could have helped in the sense, I
[Amit Varma]: think my mother was sort of there, not out of choice, but that's just the way marriages
[Amit Varma]: worked.
[Amit Varma]: And my father's loneliness in a sense for self inflicted, but what is self inflicted
[Amit Varma]: and what is not and how much agency do people have and how much are they slaves of the ways
[Amit Varma]: in which they are shaped is all open to question.
[Amit Varma]: And that sort of got me to thinking about like, for me, in an ideal marriage, your partner
[Amit Varma]: has to be your best friend, or at least a very close friend, right?
[Amit Varma]: It's about that companionship is essential.
[Amit Varma]: But I realized that all through the decades and all through human history until now, certainly
[Amit Varma]: in India, it's not been that way.
[Amit Varma]: It's sort of been instrumental, that they are playing roles.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, in a sense, you play those roles, and there isn't sort of that friendship
[Amit Varma]: or that communication or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And women are circumscribed to what those roles are.
[Amit Varma]: I did an episode with Peggy Mohan, who wrote that wonderful book about the evolution of
[Amit Varma]: languages.
[Amit Varma]: And there also there is an interesting sort of learning that also points to this, where
[Amit Varma]: she points out that when the Aryans first came to India, they were whether you call
[Amit Varma]: them migrants or invaders or whatever, it was men only, right?
[Amit Varma]: Because all their travelers, migrants, whatever, they would be hordes of men, and they would
[Amit Varma]: marry local women, whether by force or not, we don't know.
[Amit Varma]: But whatever, they would marry local women.
[Amit Varma]: And Peggy's point was a point about language, but a point about much else, which is that
[Amit Varma]: therefore, the languages they spoke would be different languages, that the women of
[Amit Varma]: a family would speak a particular kind of language, and the men would speak a particular
[Amit Varma]: kind of language.
[Amit Varma]: And initially, of course, it would be because the languages are different.
[Amit Varma]: But then gradually, it kind of remained this way.
[Amit Varma]: So a little child growing up when a boy would be with the mother, he would learn a bit of
[Amit Varma]: the mother's language, but then he would be in a men's world and he would learn the other
[Amit Varma]: language while the girls would grow up and continue learning that kind of language.
[Amit Varma]: And this also seems a powerful metaphor for a kind of separation that is sort of there.
[Amit Varma]: And just sort of going back to what you said about your grandmother and how she's reading
[Amit Varma]: a particular kind of books and your uncle is reading a different kind of book.
[Guest]: What you were picking up on there was actually something that was incredibly formative for
[Guest]: me even though I didn't realize it.
[Guest]: You know, in our schooling, we were often not schooling, but in our colleges, certainly,
[Guest]: we often taught that there's a difference between high and low literature.
[Guest]: And a lot of even Hindi literature or Bengali literature marks a little distinction, a little
[Guest]: snobbery thing, you know, that's cheap literature, that's bestsellers, in the same way that English
[Guest]: does.
[Guest]: And because I had so much respect for my grandmother, not as my grandmother, but as a person, she
[Guest]: had an incredibly open mind.
[Guest]: By which I mean that when she first encountered the concept of LGBT relationships, rather
[Guest]: than being shocked as many people in her generation were and saying that's forbidden.
[Guest]: She was extremely curious about this.
[Guest]: This was about 20 years before the laws changed in India.
[Guest]: And she asked me, she said, do you think that it is possible for you to fall in love with
[Guest]: a woman?
[Guest]: And I said, I think if all of us were given those options, wouldn't we, you know, wouldn't
[Guest]: you?
[Guest]: She said, it was just off the table, but I'm seeing now that it's a broad table.
[Guest]: And if you put it back on, then anything is possible.
[Guest]: And she thought about it, went away.
[Guest]: And then the next day, you know, doing her rounds at Newmarket and doing a little bit
[Guest]: of volunteer work and whatever it was that the women of that time did.
[Guest]: She comes back and she says, this whole thing about gender, again, this is happening 20
[Guest]: years, 30 years before these debates.
[Guest]: How much of being a man or being a woman are we taught and how much of it is innate?
[Guest]: Some of it, I guess, is innate.
[Guest]: But isn't there a huge teaching that happens with just, you know, having to take off our
[Guest]: moustaches if we are women.
[Guest]: She fixated on that, you know, or brush our moustaches out if we are men.
[Guest]: This whole thing about effeminate men and all of that.
[Guest]: And we were discussing the gender spectrum before there was a gender spectrum.
[Guest]: I'm not saying that she was a revolutionary or anything, but she was my friend, you know.
[Guest]: And what her being able to move so seamlessly between Sanskrit texts and the great classics
[Guest]: on one hand, and the full, you know, Tagoreana and everything that we were steeped in, and
[Guest]: then say, this is what I like reading.
[Guest]: I like reading these romances.
[Guest]: She read them almost like travel brochures.
[Guest]: Because in an age when people didn't travel that much, your mills and boons were the ones
[Guest]: that took you off to Australia or whatever.
[Guest]: She had a sharp sense of race as well.
[Guest]: She did say that she felt that, you know, it was filled with these white protagonists.
[Guest]: And then after a while in our minds, when we were reading them, we turned everyone of
[Guest]: different races into our own race unconsciously.
[Guest]: My uncle, my aunts, the fact that everybody was free to choose their own literature, stands
[Guest]: to me as one of the greatest privileges of them all.
[Guest]: Because over time, I've met so many writers, particularly some of the younger women writers,
[Guest]: who grew up in households either where there wasn't a book available, or where the reading
[Guest]: was very sternly prescribed.
[Guest]: You know, you might have had your bookshelves filled with great literature, but you were
[Guest]: supposed to read only that.
[Guest]: And you were supposed to read it at particular times.
[Guest]: Aside from the fact that reading is expensive, as in people have to buy books, and expensive
[Guest]: in terms of time, if you're a reader, one of the reasons why women have such a barrier
[Guest]: about reading even today in this country, is because it automatically means that you
[Guest]: have leisure.
[Guest]: And for women and men, I think there's a great suspicion, particularly for women, but also
[Guest]: for men, about this whole thing of having free time.
[Guest]: That means privacy.
[Guest]: That means you're thinking thoughts in your head, and experiencing things that are moving
[Guest]: far beyond the ambit that the family has set for you.
[Guest]: I think they taught me not to be a snob.
[Guest]: And over the years, with my own reading, often this happens with when I became a writer,
[Guest]: and I was interviewed as a writer, people would ask, and what are the books that shaped
[Guest]: you?
[Guest]: And I mentioned, you know, some of my old favorites, because you have to be, it's not
[Guest]: fair to weight this game by mentioning writers who make you look good.
[Guest]: You should be honest about your own reading at least, right?
[Guest]: So I'd mentioned the Garcia Marquez's and the Toni Morrison's Rushdie, or whoever, because
[Guest]: they were such great influences.
[Guest]: But I'd also mentioned the pulp fiction, you know, the really cheesy science fiction, or
[Guest]: the shady Bengali detective fiction, or the, you know, those Hindi confessional stories
[Guest]: that used to happen in women's magazines about women's lives, all very dramatically punched
[Guest]: up and etc.
[Guest]: And inevitably, when the interview came out, only the books that made me look like a writer
[Guest]: person would be left in the text.
[Guest]: You see what I mean?
[Guest]: I mean, there was a, I'm sure that my interviewers didn't mean to do this deliberately, but it's
[Guest]: like unconsciously in our minds, when we think of reading, we divide it into worthy and unworthy.
[Guest]: You asking a more sensitive question, though, about intimate family relationships, was that
[Amit Varma]: it?
[Amit Varma]: About the private history of families?
[Amit Varma]: About really the different roles of men and women and how, and not different, but unequal,
[Amit Varma]: where the roles of women are incredibly circumscribed.
[Amit Varma]: And what happens, I think, as kids is that we take for granted that the world around
[Amit Varma]: us is the world as it is in the world as it should be, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: But I think at some point, layers begin to peel off and you realize that no, this is
[Amit Varma]: not how it should be.
[Amit Varma]: And you begin to view the world differently.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe over time, you developed frames of seeing the world in a particular way.
[Amit Varma]: So it's like a dual question, almost, which is partly about, or let's just narrow it down
[Amit Varma]: to one question, which is about how was your consciousness of all of this?
[Amit Varma]: And over the years, how did your feminism thereby evolve?
[Amit Varma]: Because I guess, you know, when I did my episode with Mrinal Pandey, she mentioned that when
[Amit Varma]: she was 13 or something, she had an argument with her mother, because she felt that her
[Amit Varma]: mother was spending too much time obsessing over the meal she would cook for Mrinalji's
[Amit Varma]: dad.
[Amit Varma]: And she was like, why are you doing this is food is not that important.
[Amit Varma]: Why don't you?
[Amit Varma]: Why are you so stressed all the time about the food?
[Amit Varma]: And that's like a feminist instinct.
[Amit Varma]: But at that point, as she said, she hadn't read about feminism, she wouldn't have known
[Amit Varma]: the term, she wouldn't have, you know, been able to put a frame to it.
[Amit Varma]: So now in your sense, one, of course, you are brought up by a matriarch, as it were,
[Amit Varma]: or have these role models around you, whose lived experience is an experience, perhaps
[Amit Varma]: to some extent of not conforming to their roles, and perhaps to some extent, of, you
[Amit Varma]: know, making those roles expand and fill out around them.
[Amit Varma]: But, you know, we've spoken a lot about Nilanjana Roy, the reader, but if we are to talk about
[Amit Varma]: Nilanjana Roy, the feminist, tell me a bit about that, where, you know, how do you look
[Amit Varma]: at the lived feminism of people around you in many small ways, the fights that they fight,
[Amit Varma]: and what were the frameworks that you then began to develop?
[Amit Varma]: And did it not at some point in time, being in India, and so on and so forth, leave you
[Amit Varma]: with a profound sense of anger as well?
[Guest]: And if so, how did you deal with that anger?
[Guest]: My feminism did not come from the family.
[Guest]: In the family, there were many useful role models, I realized later that the real gifts
[Guest]: of the family, for example, was that they took love, even in the middle of heated arguments
[Guest]: and quarrels and differences of opinion, for granted.
[Guest]: There was an equality between my father, who passed away last year, and my mother, in the
[Guest]: sense that they were both free to quarrel with each other when they disagreed.
[Guest]: And they were partners, they were companions.
[Guest]: My father wholeheartedly and his father, surprisingly, you know, my Thakurda, who was a manager for
[Guest]: Andrew Yule in Cuttack, and then lived with my parents for some years and brought Bengali
[Guest]: and many other things into our lives.
[Guest]: He was a very gentle man.
[Guest]: I grew used, I grew a little spoiled by the fact that I would not call the men in my family
[Guest]: feminists per se, but they were men who saw women as equals, you know.
[Guest]: And that spoiled me a little bit for the rest of the world.
[Guest]: It was often a shock in my early work to encounter men who were misogynists.
[Guest]: I had been corseted, and I had been fortunate also in school by and large, not to come across
[Guest]: too much in the way of misogyny, where it showed for my mother was that she was part
[Guest]: of the generation who were expected to be superwomen.
[Guest]: So she became a lawyer at 39.
[Guest]: And I think we were a little bit of family mythology around that, you know.
[Guest]: Before that, she'd done various things.
[Guest]: She taught in nursery schools.
[Guest]: She was a fantastic mother in the sense that she used to just pick up whatever random friends
[Guest]: of ours and us were wandering around the neighborhood and take us off on adventures and excursions.
[Guest]: So one day we'd be swimming, or we'd be going to the Kutum Minar and exploring things.
[Guest]: And my family was a family of women drivers.
[Guest]: Most of the men drove terribly, and almost all of the women drove well.
[Guest]: And I remember one of my first feelings of deep independence was actually learning to
[Guest]: drive at probably an illegal age, you know.
[Guest]: And my mother taught me, and my grandmother refined that teaching.
[Guest]: My grandmother was also a crack driver.
[Guest]: And being a crack driver, being a decent shot, that kind of stuff, was not feminism, but
[Guest]: it made you feel like you were holding your own in a world that you could already see
[Guest]: was unequal.
[Guest]: Where it felt really unfair was at a very early age, I felt circumscribed by all these
[Guest]: rules about, you can't go out on the road, you have to take your brother with you, you
[Guest]: have to do this, you have to do that.
[Guest]: Everything that was there for our safety, particularly in Delhi, I felt it like a blow.
[Guest]: In Calcutta, at least, I was reasonably free.
[Guest]: By evening, you had to come back in any Indian city, you know, that was the unspoken rule
[Guest]: for a young Indian woman.
[Guest]: The first time that I was pushed around and hurt or molested on the street, I think it
[Guest]: comes as a shock, and then you realize that you have to defend yourself against it.
[Guest]: And in a sense, that molesting carries a little bit of egalitarianism against, you know, unless
[Guest]: you're cocooned in an air-conditioned car all your life, it's something that you're
[Guest]: going to experience as a woman.
[Guest]: But from a very early age, I was sharply aware, not of the territory of feminism, you know,
[Guest]: we were brought up with this myth of women and men were equal.
[Guest]: And even in my family, the women would bring the food out of the kitchen, or if the staff
[Guest]: was doing that, the women would still be the ones hovering, the men didn't hover.
[Guest]: The men didn't feed everyone else at the table.
[Guest]: And those little subtle things are where you see that, you know, no matter how much you
[Guest]: progressed, there is still territory that's not as equal as it seems, if that makes sense.
[Guest]: The women were expected to hold down a career and come back and be perfect hostesses, be
[Guest]: mother and do this, you know, there was always an and, the men didn't have an and, they could
[Guest]: just be one thing or the other and somebody would make sure that the shirts were starched.
[Guest]: You see what I mean?
[Guest]: It's in the body that you feel it.
[Guest]: I was a child who lived so deeply in my mind, you know, not just in the imagination, but
[Guest]: I think in a mind that I've talked to Manjula about this, Manjula Padmanabhan, who's another
[Guest]: of the Delhi writers whom I admire very much, Ursula K. Le Guin's talked about the non-gendered
[Guest]: mind, the fact that when you're creating something, you're deeply immersed in studying something.
[Guest]: Your mind has no gender at that time, it's beyond gender, you know.
[Guest]: And often living in an Indian city, wherever you were, felt like being rudely and violently
[Guest]: pushed back into your body.
[Guest]: That only enhanced when I became, that sense became doubly enhanced when I was a reporter.
[Guest]: And I found myself sometimes to my absolute fury being dependent on the goodwill of photographers
[Guest]: for my safety or dependent on the concern of editors for my safety.
[Guest]: And as much as I was glad that they were caring, part of me really resented it, really resented
[Guest]: having to be dependent.
[Guest]: I experienced the difference between the genders in India first, not as a battle or as an ideology,
[Guest]: but as territory, you see.
[Guest]: So to me, even now, the city has a gendered geography.
[Guest]: Wherever I go, even in the mountains, I walk fairly fearlessly all across.
[Guest]: I walked for years.
[Guest]: I think, you know, part of writing a book is not the book itself.
[Guest]: It's what you discover on the way to writing a book, a lot of which you will discard.
[Guest]: I was diffident about writing a certain section in Black River, which has to do with the Yamuna
[Guest]: itself and the people who live on its banks.
[Guest]: And so to get over that diffidence, I walked the length of as much of the Yamuna as I could
[Guest]: to just learn it spatially.
[Guest]: Even if it's not for the book, you know, it might come out into just a chapter or a couple
[Guest]: of sentences.
[Guest]: You're doing that really for yourself.
[Guest]: You're learning a part of your city that you would not know anything about or a part of
[Guest]: your country or a part of your history that you would not know anything about otherwise.
[Guest]: And in that time, I've experienced aggressive acts in the Aravalis and the Yamuna maybe
[Guest]: three times on all those walks.
[Guest]: And each time has been unpleasant and mercifully, you know, not very serious.
[Guest]: But each time my guides to whether a territory was safe or unsafe for the women.
[Guest]: So when you're walking around the Aravalis trying to learn, you know, part of that landscape,
[Guest]: the women will tell you, this is absolutely safe until 3 p.m.
[Guest]: But after 3 p.m., you know, the men come in and they'll sit there and just be careful.
[Guest]: And the first thing they'll say is, are you on your own and language is a protection.
[Guest]: If you come across as English speaking and from a very, very obviously, you know, privileged
[Guest]: background.
[Guest]: If you're a wandering woman, then either you're mad, you know, like Laldi, then the saints
[Guest]: of old or you're exceptionally privileged, you know, we carry that with us like a badge
[Guest]: and it becomes your safety, that layer of privilege or whatever.
[Guest]: Walking is stressful, but it became my way of pushing back.
[Guest]: I think, you know, we all have these quiet battles.
[Guest]: Meanwhile, the river of feminism that's flowed, I think I'm sometimes troubled by this.
[Guest]: We act as though the battles of the past are over and they are not.
[Guest]: Nobody talks about dowry debts today.
[Guest]: It's moved to a different corner of sexual violence.
[Guest]: You know, when I was a reporter at the New York Times, bear with me because these are
[Guest]: apparently disconnected, but they actually lining up in a row.
[Guest]: When I was a reporter at the New York Times, we found ourselves, me and my editor, Jean
[Guest]: Moore, who was an absolute genius of an editor.
[Guest]: She had this way of not making your story hers, but of asking the right questions and
[Guest]: pushing you in the right direction and turning an opinion piece into more of a reported piece.
[Guest]: She wanted to make sure that what you were seeing was really the truth of the landscape
[Guest]: that you were looking at or the truth of people's lives.
[Guest]: And she taught me to be respectful to the people whom we were talking to, whether they
[Guest]: were the victims of violence or whether they were women who were surrogate mothers or whether
[Guest]: they were homeless women on the streets.
[Guest]: And we kept running into this story.
[Guest]: We kept trying to do other stories on gender and kept running into that first wave of mainstream
[Guest]: ritualized street violence, you know, and that was just a reflection of the dowry debts
[Guest]: of an earlier time.
[Guest]: That violence and that belief that women are somehow inferior, that, you know, you can
[Guest]: be killed if you don't bring enough to a marriage or as happened with the more sophisticated
[Guest]: evolution of dowry debts.
[Guest]: You could be killed if you had contributed as much as your family was able to contribute
[Guest]: and then it was time for the next bride to come in, you see.
[Guest]: The street violence was coming in more or less as a reaction to a phenomenon of those
[Guest]: times, which was that women were moving more around, they were moving out of their houses,
[Guest]: they were migrating more, they were taking up jobs.
[Guest]: And this wave of violence was the pushback.
[Guest]: And despite that, women kept coming until the economy tightened, the cultural and social
[Guest]: politics also changed.
[Guest]: And one of the great tragedies of our time, it's been reported, but to my mind a little
[Guest]: underreported given everything else that's going on, is the fact that women have receded
[Guest]: in every way from the economic space, from public spaces as such, you know, from, there's
[Guest]: a movement backwards in that sense.
[Guest]: I think I realized very early on that my view as, you know, often we name check privilege,
[Guest]: but I don't mean to do that.
[Guest]: I just mean that literally if you grew up as an upper caste Hindu woman, then there
[Guest]: are many things that you are simply not going to see.
[Guest]: So a lot of feminism for me, whether I was listening to Gloria Steinem or bell hooks
[Guest]: or Indian rich abroad, or whether I was reading or learning about the work of grassroots movements
[Guest]: out here in India from Chipko to, you know, the major caste movements to the major movements
[Guest]: of organized labor.
[Guest]: Those have been written and reported about, but again, they aren't mainstream as such.
[Guest]: I think I took a step back from feminist activism myself.
[Guest]: My role has been much more the participant, the observer in all of these protests.
[Guest]: And sometimes, you know, the speaker, but I've never felt that, I've always felt that
[Guest]: it's a good idea to pass the mic to people who are actually there engaging with struggles
[Guest]: on the ground, rather than to hand the mic to someone like me, who's just witnessing
[Guest]: or observing.
[Guest]: But the other thing that I learned was again from the women who are sometimes most deeply
[Guest]: engaged in this kind of struggle.
[Guest]: This was just before the December protests in India of 2012 over the murder of Jyoti,
[Guest]: the young woman on the bus who was so brutally raped and then killed for the crime of just
[Guest]: being out to see a movie and being available and being there and being unprotected.
[Guest]: And before that, for two years, there had been this running wave of protests all across
[Guest]: the rural parts of Haryana and Jind, you know.
[Guest]: Those protests were grievous.
[Guest]: I cannot tell you how many tragedies were folded into, were laid behind those protests.
[Guest]: I met fathers, mothers, sisters, brothers, whose lives had been devastated by the casual
[Guest]: murders or rapes or dismemberments of the women that they held dear.
[Guest]: And somehow, despite that, every protest that you'd go to, somebody would bring out a drum,
[Guest]: somebody would be playing music, somebody would be singing protest songs.
[Guest]: And I remember the second time I joined in this, this was in Jind, it must have showed
[Guest]: on my face that I was surprised at this, where were the serious speeches, where was the one-minute
[Guest]: silence.
[Guest]: And the women just looked at me and said, we're not protesting to be sad, we're protesting
[Guest]: for better lives, we're protesting in order to be happy.
[Guest]: And whatever else we can't claim, you know, we can't claim equal rights, we can't claim
[Guest]: the right even to be safe in our own homes or out on the streets, but we can claim the
[Guest]: right to be happy in this moment.
[Guest]: And that was, you know, that was a very powerful learning for me.
[Guest]: I think most of my relationship with feminism has come from there.
[Guest]: And historically speaking, this is where being a reader comes in handy.
[Guest]: I think, you know, the idea that how most of the feminist victories have been won, women
[Guest]: are equal, what are they crying about now, in one way or the other that comes up, MeToo
[Guest]: is where our attention is focused at this time.
[Guest]: But it is certainly not the only battle around, you know, from reproductive rights to the
[Guest]: right to education, whatever you wear, or whatever community you come from, which has
[Guest]: been such a big thing in India right now, and in Afghanistan and places like that.
[Guest]: I think we forget how recent all of this is.
[Guest]: Just a few generations back, women in England, in Austin writes about this, did not have
[Guest]: the right to own property, because they were property themselves.
[Guest]: That entire obsession with marriage that comes through in her books, is basically coming
[Guest]: through because women had no life if they could not make a good marriage.
[Guest]: And that's where, you know, that underlying all the humor and the lightness of it, and
[Guest]: the two inches of ivory, it's not two inches of ivory.
[Guest]: You're talking about the lives of generations of women who were nothing and had nothing
[Guest]: and could only become governesses or, you know, burdens on their family, if they did
[Guest]: not find a man to say yes to them, right?
[Guest]: That was pretty recent.
[Guest]: I wrote this, I think, as a Facebook post, but I was reading Ram Mohan Roy and Raja Ram
[Guest]: Mohan Roy, the 18th century reformers letters the other day.
[Guest]: And I think for the first time it struck me, you know, what we know of Raja Ram Mohan Roy
[Guest]: is that, yes, he had the laws of Sati changed.
[Guest]: It's when you start reading the letters that you realize how long that campaign ran and
[Guest]: how exhausting it was on him and his family, you know, because he defended orthodox Hindus
[Guest]: who were arguing at that time with perfect logic for the right to keep burning women.
[Guest]: I looked at those records and some of the women in the Calcutta district who became
[Guest]: Satis not so long ago, this would have been less than, what, five generations, six generations?
[Guest]: That's how recent it is.
[Guest]: Some of them were 15 years old or 16 years old or 12.
[Guest]: And the oldest would have been in their 70s and 80s, you know, facing the pyre.
[Guest]: And what horrifies me is not, you know, more evidence of the fact that we can be barbaric,
[Guest]: all of us.
[Guest]: What horrifies me is that we were willing for the longest time to intellectually justify
[Guest]: this and that, you know, the British get a lot of credit for changing the law, but they
[Guest]: changed the law only after cautious dipstick checks that there were enough Hindus who would
[Guest]: support this, you see.
[Guest]: It's only been less than a generation since my own grandmother, my father's mother, her
[Guest]: first marriage, which she did not like, happened when she was very young.
[Guest]: She was just about, I think, something like 13 or 15.
[Guest]: And she extricated herself from that marriage, found an independent life somehow, and married
[Guest]: my grandfather many years later.
[Guest]: But all of these things are very close.
[Guest]: It's not even been a hundred years since women in India won the right to vote.
[Guest]: And we were pretty enlightened in our pre-independence debates about that.
[Guest]: But there was, even at that time, there was a strand of opinion that thought that women
[Guest]: should not really be bothered or troubled with this, you see.
[Guest]: So we forget that everything that we talk about in terms of equality, and this is not
[Guest]: just gender, but the entire post-World War II landscape of human rights are important.
[Guest]: We should not discriminate against each other.
[Guest]: We have had enough of the Holocaust.
[Guest]: All of this is very recent, and it flies in the face, I think, of centuries of human practice.
[Guest]: And it's wise to remember that when you're talking about feminism.
[Guest]: I have taken you down a whole different river this time.
[Amit Varma]: No, no.
[Amit Varma]: Such a learning experience listening to you.
[Amit Varma]: So before I get to my follow-up question, I am reminded of a song, because since you
[Amit Varma]: mentioned people in protest also sing and dance, you spoke about women in the 19th century
[Amit Varma]: waiting and hoping someone says yes.
[Amit Varma]: And there is this lovely poem by Laurence Alma Tadima called, If No One Ever Marries
[Amit Varma]: Me, which Natalie Merchant turned into this beautiful song, which I'll link from the show
[Amit Varma]: notes.
[Amit Varma]: Have you heard it?
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll just read this out for the benefit of my listeners.
[Amit Varma]: If No One Ever Marries Me by Laurence Alma Tadima, and despite the name, this is written
[Amit Varma]: by a woman.
[Amit Varma]: If no one ever marries me, and I don't see why they should, for nurse says I'm not pretty
[Amit Varma]: and I'm seldom very good.
[Amit Varma]: If no one ever marries me, I shan't mind very much.
[Amit Varma]: I shall buy a squirrel in a cage and a little rabbit hutch.
[Amit Varma]: I shall have a cottage near a wood and a pony on my own, and a little lamb quite clean and
[Amit Varma]: tame that I can take to town.
[Amit Varma]: And when I'm getting really old, at 28 or nine, I shall buy a little orphan girl and
[Amit Varma]: bring her up as mine.
[Amit Varma]: And this also sort of reminded me of Hemabati Sen, you know, who I, you know, first read
[Amit Varma]: about in Kavitha Rao's excellent book on lady doctors.
[Amit Varma]: And again, another sort of remarkable woman beginning with, you know, she was married,
[Amit Varma]: I think, at the age of nine, to a husband who was 40 something, and he already had kids.
[Amit Varma]: And during the day, she would play with his children and at night, she'd be raped.
[Amit Varma]: And when she was 11, he died, and her in-laws died, and her parents died.
[Amit Varma]: So she's in this little village, I think it was in Silhet, she's in this little village
[Amit Varma]: in Bengal, far from everything, 11 years old, no relatives, no one to take care of her,
[Amit Varma]: no money.
[Amit Varma]: And she goes from there to actually get an education and become a lady doctor and phenomenal
[Amit Varma]: woman.
[Amit Varma]: And then she writes a book and she keeps all her writings in a trunk, which is not opened
[Amit Varma]: for 70 years, until 70 years after her death, and then it's published as her memoirs.
[Amit Varma]: So a fantastic story.
[Amit Varma]: And I want to ask you, therefore, about the long arc, right?
[Amit Varma]: One of the things that you mentioned is that in some ways, today, women have gone backwards,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and some of those we can see statistical indicators like women in the workforce, for
[Amit Varma]: example, and I've had many episodes on that with the likes of Namita Bhandari and Shrena
[Amit Varma]: Bhattacharya.
[Amit Varma]: And, but I've also spoken to people like Parmita Vohra, Kavita Krishnan, Manjima Bhattacharya
[Amit Varma]: recently, who had more optimism that in the longer arc, there was progress.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, you can't ignore that, that there might be moments where it seems that
[Amit Varma]: things are getting bad.
[Amit Varma]: But if you just have to take a step back, and not allow yourself to sort of get despondent,
[Amit Varma]: and you have to see that longer arc, what's your sense about that longer arc?
[Guest]: I believe in it.
[Guest]: And that's a short answer, but I don't think there is room for despair.
[Guest]: I think despair is energy sapping.
[Guest]: But aside from that, I think despair is built on false perception.
[Guest]: We are so in love with our own time, that we also like to think of our wars as extraordinary,
[Guest]: you know, oh, my God, World War Three is on the horizon.
[Guest]: Well, look at every century of human history, really, and I cannot remember a time that
[Guest]: was free of wars.
[Guest]: We also live through the extraordinary burst of hope that accompanied the falling of the
[Guest]: Berlin Wall.
[Guest]: You know, we have this movement from progress to regression to finally, let's hope that
[Guest]: we keep moving forwards rather than backwards.
[Guest]: But if you want hope, it's there all through history.
[Guest]: Let's stay on gender for a second.
[Guest]: But women like Andal, women like Mirabai, women like Laldeed, these were three women
[Guest]: who in different centuries chose to live their own lives as free as possible and chose to
[Guest]: define religion and faith in their own ways.
[Guest]: I still remember Laldeed's vachas so beautifully translated by Ranjith Hoskote, you know, where
[Guest]: she says, I have gone into the forest and wrestled with the lion.
[Guest]: And there's this roar from her century, which was, she died in 1392, I think.
[Guest]: And from her century to mine, her saying, I have fought for what I have.
[Guest]: I have worked for the knowledge, you know, in the rest of the vachas, she says something,
[Guest]: she says, what there was in the books I've taken and what there wasn't in the books,
[Guest]: I have taught myself.
[Guest]: And then she says, I've gone into the forest and wrestled with the lions.
[Guest]: And basically, she's saying, I own this territory, I will be me, whether or not you allow me
[Guest]: to be myself or not.
[Guest]: So when I look at the history of just narrowing it down to either India or America, which
[Guest]: is going through its own grievous, grievous moment of regression on many, many fronts,
[Guest]: but definitely on gender rights and, you know, the whole Black Lives Matter movement being
[Guest]: followed by the rise of white supremacy.
[Guest]: Do you see an absence of grit?
[Guest]: When you see Meena Kotwal at the Mooknayak, you know, one of my favorite media outlets,
[Guest]: when you see the women of Khabar Lahariya, you know, moving by degrees towards finding
[Guest]: themselves in possession of a camera, taking the story firmly from the hands of people
[Guest]: who will interpret for them.
[Guest]: To your grassroots readers, I see a vacuum at the political stage, but I don't think
[Guest]: you know, a lot of token women up there, the Hindu right wing is brilliant at foregrounding
[Guest]: women and giving them rules to play within that project.
[Guest]: But I would venture to add rules to play without political agency of their own, you know, without
[Guest]: asking themselves, is this really good for us?
[Guest]: You can do what you want to, you can have a great deal of power.
[Guest]: But if you dare to voice an opinion about women or about communal disharmony that is
[Guest]: different from what your group says, you will mercilessly be cut out of your group.
[Guest]: Given that, I don't see, I think we are going through a time of churn, a time of inevitable
[Guest]: questioning.
[Guest]: We will fall further backwards because we're trying to decide on something really big.
[Guest]: Nations are so new, nations are so young, right?
[Guest]: It's an idea that's been introduced and that will need to be defended not once, but over
[Guest]: and over again.
[Guest]: With so many countries, I see the same question arising, don't you?
[Guest]: Which is, what is it that holds us together?
[Guest]: What should hold us together?
[Guest]: What makes us a whole?
[Guest]: And the answers to that question are either going to be uniting, which is an extremely
[Guest]: difficult project.
[Guest]: If you think about it, it's a mental state of hand, you're saying all of us by dint of
[Guest]: geography and shared history are together, but not those people across the border, you
[Guest]: know, who share the same geography and at least part of the same history.
[Guest]: Or you're doing the simple thing of dividing people by saying, we are the only ones who
[Guest]: belong and the rest of them don't.
[Guest]: And that's a very clean story.
[Guest]: I see a lot of things in terms of narratives.
[Guest]: And I see that in the churn that we're going through at this time, don't you see that some
[Guest]: people are falling back in search of an older, maybe more regressive, but ultimately a safer
[Guest]: narrative.
[Guest]: There's a king, he's an evil king, or she is an evil queen, you know, they're tyrants.
[Guest]: That's familiar.
[Guest]: You see what I mean?
[Guest]: If you're moving away from democracy back into an autocracy, and we've had so much written
[Guest]: about autocracies and the pull of strongmen and all of that, at least that's familiar.
[Guest]: One of my fellow columnists at the Financial Times, Janan Ganesh, wrote recently that the
[Guest]: direction that he thinks that Europe might head in is not actually towards autocracies,
[Guest]: but he thinks that they're heading towards a time of anarchy.
[Guest]: And for many people, not knowing the uncertainty of we had an imperfect, messy democracy, we're
[Guest]: trying to work out what the meaning of this democracy is in a time when you also have
[Guest]: technological and oligarchic pressures.
[Guest]: And we're trying to define ourselves in the middle of, you know, these enormous tectonic
[Guest]: pressures.
[Guest]: You'll choose certainty over uncertainty, most of humankind would.
[Guest]: Change is frightening, right?
[Amit Varma]: So a couple of thoughts, and then my follow up question.
[Amit Varma]: One thought is that what you asked about that common question that reverberates, that what
[Amit Varma]: can bring us together, how can we unite and all of that, I think what's happening in modern
[Amit Varma]: times is that there is a trend that goes in two different directions, and I don't know
[Amit Varma]: which will prevail.
[Amit Varma]: And one has to do with a crumbling away of the mainstream, but this time, in the context
[Amit Varma]: of nation states that I think more and more nation states with their hard boundaries that
[Amit Varma]: prevent people from reaching across and so forth, are becoming irrelevant.
[Amit Varma]: And the reason is technology, because technology is allowing us to one it's empowering individuals
[Amit Varma]: in a way that politics, you know, has failed to do in many different contexts.
[Amit Varma]: And it's helping people reach out and make geography irrelevant.
[Amit Varma]: And in that sense, what will unite us, I think there's a role that technology can play with
[Amit Varma]: the natural liberalism that it brings about.
[Amit Varma]: But the opposite is also true, which is that technology and we'll talk about social media
[Amit Varma]: afterwards.
[Amit Varma]: But how technology can always also divide us and polarize us and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And when you speak about people falling back and becoming more regressive, I think of the
[Amit Varma]: constant struggle of humankind, the ongoing struggle of humankind, as a struggle of human
[Amit Varma]: beings against our own programming, right?
[Amit Varma]: All animals, in a sense, have a source code inside them, they're programmed to be a certain
[Amit Varma]: way.
[Amit Varma]: And human beings are the only species, which are all which is also programmed to reflect
[Amit Varma]: on that programming, and to mitigate it and to fight against it, right.
[Amit Varma]: And we are, of course, programmed in contradictory ways as well, we are programmed to be tribal.
[Amit Varma]: But at a different level, we are also programmed to be altruistic.
[Amit Varma]: And we can reflect upon our programming.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, we can mitigate it and fight it and let the better angels of our natures,
[Amit Varma]: as Steven Pinker eloquently puts it, emerge from there.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that that's sort of a constant battle.
[Amit Varma]: And it might seem that because of technological trends, and because of what's happening around
[Amit Varma]: us, the way the worst angels of the worst demons of our natures, as it were, it can
[Amit Varma]: sort of be amplified by our technology as well.
[Amit Varma]: And that's sort of the negative side of it.
[Amit Varma]: And we kind of come back to it.
[Amit Varma]: But these were my two musings.
[Amit Varma]: But my follow up question is this that in an episode I did recently with Shruti Kapila,
[Amit Varma]: she spoke about how she would be very keen on seeing whether the women of India can be
[Amit Varma]: united as voters.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you were talking about women in politics being mainly tokenistic and the natural
[Amit Varma]: question can arise as it has for Shruti that why don't women just see, just look at their
[Amit Varma]: own interests and then vote as one.
[Amit Varma]: But I also did an episode with Rukmini, the data journalist, and she pointed out that
[Amit Varma]: all her studies and all the data that she's looked at, showed that this is not the case.
[Amit Varma]: Women actually vote because of a multiplicity of factors, and thinking of themselves as
[Amit Varma]: women and fighting back against the inequities is not something that drives their voting
[Amit Varma]: at least.
[Amit Varma]: And one reason for that, of course, could be that all parties are equally misogynistic
[Amit Varma]: and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So what do you do that society?
[Amit Varma]: But I think a deeper reason is that a lot of women also you will find rail against feminism,
[Amit Varma]: you know, which is so completely bizarre, that they're happy playing in the name of
[Amit Varma]: tradition at, you know, reinforcing the subsidiary roles that they play.
[Amit Varma]: And my question here is this, that you've referred earlier to how one of the things
[Amit Varma]: that you loved about our society, that you love about our society, and that I do as well,
[Amit Varma]: is that we are so open and so tolerant and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: I remember I had a conversation with the politician JP Narayan, and I was talking about how illiberal
[Amit Varma]: our society is.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, that, you know, you look at gender, you look at caste, you look at so
[Amit Varma]: many things, and we're deeply illiberal, and he pointed out that, if you without denying
[Amit Varma]: it, that if you look at it from another lens, we're deeply liberal, that there is, we are
[Amit Varma]: a very assimilative society, if you look at our food, our clothing, our culture, so much
[Amit Varma]: is really assimilative and tolerant and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: Now, what I've been struggling to grasp is that today we are in a place where our society
[Amit Varma]: is unquestionably divided, where there is bigotry and sexism, and all of that is widespread.
[Amit Varma]: And my sense and the great book by Akshay Mukul on the Gita Press, and I had an episode
[Amit Varma]: with him seems to bear it out.
[Amit Varma]: My sense is we were always like this.
[Amit Varma]: This is not something new.
[Amit Varma]: These aspects of our society have not been shaped by a hateful politics, but it is the
[Amit Varma]: other way around.
[Amit Varma]: Our hateful politics is supply springing up in response to demand, and that our society
[Amit Varma]: has also always been like this.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, how would looking back at the span of all these years where you've grown
[Amit Varma]: up and you worked and you've written and you've thought about this country and you've engaged
[Amit Varma]: with our politics in whatever way.
[Amit Varma]: What do you feel about this larger question that, you know, was our society always like
[Amit Varma]: this?
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense, you know, is it now that politics has caught up with society?
[Amit Varma]: And you know, what are your sort of thoughts?
[Guest]: I'm trying to see where I stand between hope and despair, because the truth is, it's not
[Guest]: just the rise to power of a particular person or a particular party or that the Hindu right
[Guest]: wing is in charge.
[Guest]: I think what grieves us most is our own selves, isn't that it?
[Guest]: It's our neighbors turning this way, that way for whatever reasons.
[Guest]: And I've never wanted to live anywhere outside the country.
[Guest]: I'm speaking personally and perhaps very selfishly at this moment.
[Guest]: I've never had a desire to have a life abroad, to visit abroad, to spend time there, yes.
[Guest]: You know, the world is a big place and we're all citizens of the world as well.
[Guest]: I don't think I've ever been as heartbroken by what is happening in this country as I
[Guest]: am today.
[Guest]: And as time goes by, as the political opposition fails and fails again, as our social fabric
[Guest]: seems to crumble under the enormous pressure, let me say, put on it by a constant wave of
[Guest]: tech enabled propaganda and hatred.
[Guest]: We've seen, I've been tracking that hatred for a while and I've seen it move from being
[Guest]: little bubbles on Facebook, which is bad enough and corrosive enough to being casual and mainstream
[Guest]: and on your television sets and it is unreasonable not to expect human beings not to be changed
[Guest]: by what they're consuming, okay.
[Guest]: Ravish Kumar has said this, other people have said this, at this point we are consuming
[Guest]: poison and make no mistake, that has changed us, it is going to change us if we harden
[Guest]: our hearts.
[Guest]: If we continue to think that it is alright to condone extreme violence, extreme dispossession
[Guest]: of any one of us, the moment that you turn around as a country and you say, you can be
[Guest]: killed, you know, we used to have this running joke among a certain percentage of us journalists
[Guest]: about the abyss, I'd just about stopped writing op-eds at that stage and gone back to a job
[Guest]: that allowed me to read books instead as it happened.
[Guest]: But all of the op-eds about India, written in India and outside India, used to have that
[Guest]: damn abyss around, right, that yes, we are on the edge of the abyss, we have descended
[Guest]: into the abyss and at one point you are going to see that we are deep inside this morass
[Guest]: and that what we are racing towards is clinically a place that no country, no nation, no people
[Guest]: wants to go towards, you know, it's very hard to turn away from that violence.
[Guest]: But because I read, I also remember reading accounts of first the horror, the helplessness
[Guest]: that people felt when the inevitable violence of partition happened.
[Guest]: And this was a country that had just been born where you barely had a government.
[Guest]: The British had just left, you know, without leaving much in place to stem this violence.
[Guest]: And after it stopped, the question on people's minds were, are we even a country?
[Guest]: Is there anything that holds us together?
[Guest]: I will say this, you know, it's not a question of set aside Modi this, Modi that, the Hindu
[Guest]: Rashtra, you've had enough people who know deeply, who have studied the subject talk
[Guest]: to you about this.
[Guest]: But if your country does not hold together, then sooner or later you're just going to
[Guest]: break into smaller and smaller pieces.
[Guest]: Somebody will demand a homeland of their own, somebody will say, all right, now that we've
[Guest]: finished saying that they don't belong, they don't belong either.
[Guest]: And sometimes when I look at the map of India, it seems that it is smouldering, that there
[Guest]: are fires everywhere.
[Guest]: You have to get back to what holds you together.
[Guest]: And it's been a long time since we focused on that.
[Guest]: For a while after independence, I think what held us together was a combination of necessity
[Guest]: and humanity.
[Guest]: And all those, you know, slightly cheesy hum ek hai, anek hai, you know, unity and diversity
[Guest]: ads and all of that.
[Guest]: They were cheesy, but they had a function, there was functionality to it.
[Guest]: And that was to remind us that simply we couldn't afford hate, we didn't have to love each other.
[Guest]: A lot of this living side by side with each other, these agreements that we hammered out,
[Guest]: even in America, even in England or Europe, it's only in the big cities that you have
[Guest]: assimilation, integration, you know, all of these things, they cut against our deepest
[Guest]: tribal instincts, right?
[Guest]: And still, and still we abide.
[Guest]: And still we fight back.
[Guest]: And still we try to find a way to say that this shouldn't happen, and maybe we should
[Guest]: be together.
[Guest]: And still there is courage, an enormous amount of courage.
[Guest]: So if you ask me where there's hope, the hope for me lies in the fact that many people haven't
[Guest]: given up, that there is a quiet bravery, whether it's in protests, such as the farmers protest
[Guest]: or the citizens protest.
[Guest]: It's easy to mock people who are standing up and reading out the preamble.
[Guest]: But if you've been there on a cold winter night in Delhi or out in Lucknow or somewhere,
[Guest]: and you've heard the fervor and the faith in people's voices, you know that somewhere
[Guest]: there's a contrary ripple that is reaching back to that time and saying, what if?
[Guest]: What if we could imagine ourselves back into existence again?
[Guest]: I don't think any country skips that, Amit.
[Guest]: You know, that question of who we are and Europe is facing it in its own way, you know.
[Guest]: If Europe lets go of nationhood, then what is it but a collection of warring empires
[Guest]: without colonies, you see?
[Guest]: What is America if it lets go of its original declarations?
[Guest]: So again, here we are back at the imagination.
[Guest]: You have to imagine yourself into a people.
[Guest]: You have to imagine this whole project of unity, diversity, living together, secularism.
[Guest]: It isn't as easy as just seeing it.
[Guest]: One thing that forged people together after the freedom struggle was if you read Manohar
[Guest]: Malgankar and if you read Mulk Raj Adan and other writers from that period, Kamla Das,
[Guest]: etc., Kanthapura, Raja Rao's great book, you see that it wasn't this cartoon story
[Guest]: of the whole country coming together to fight the British.
[Guest]: Among the Indians, there were many who rested their faith in the princely states that were
[Guest]: taken apart after independence.
[Guest]: There were many who were also perfectly happy to let the British be the emperors of this
[Guest]: age.
[Guest]: Take care what is wrong.
[Guest]: We are Rai Bahadurs.
[Guest]: We are benefiting from the system.
[Guest]: They're not so bad, etc.
[Guest]: You have to imagine independence for yourself and any country that can do that has a shot
[Guest]: at imagining its way back to safety from where we are heading.
[Guest]: The only thing is that once you have a certain kind of conflict or breakout, once you open
[Guest]: the doors to all the things that we are fearing, whether it's some people fear civil war,
[Guest]: some people fear another genocide, some people just fear a time of vast persecution, endless
[Guest]: persecution that's normalized and where all you have to ask of the other people in
[Guest]: this project is to look away.
[Guest]: You know, you assure them immunity and you say look away and that's all that is required.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, I'll make a brief anti-national aside and then ask the follow-up question
[Amit Varma]: to the follow-up question, going further and further down tributaries and branching to
[Amit Varma]: God knows where.
[Amit Varma]: And the aside is that what you mentioned about the country breaking up and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: Sometimes I wonder if it would have been better if we weren't one united country, but if we
[Amit Varma]: were many countries, like I did an episode on the great VP Menon with Narayani Basu.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the sort of things I realized while reading up on Menon and Sardar Patel and what
[Amit Varma]: they did was that what Patel and Menon did in bringing this great country politically
[Amit Varma]: together, you know, between the years 47 to 50, was like an act of fast track colonization.
[Amit Varma]: What the British did over centuries, these guys did in a few months, a lot of it through
[Amit Varma]: violence and coercion.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, I believe the end doesn't justify the means.
[Amit Varma]: And a lot of it through promises that were later broken.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to be in many ways a profoundly immoral act.
[Amit Varma]: But leave that aside.
[Amit Varma]: It is what it is.
[Amit Varma]: And both of us love this country for what it is and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: But that's just a thought I sometimes have that maybe if we were many different countries
[Amit Varma]: or different nations, governance would be much better because the point is, governance
[Amit Varma]: gets better, the more local it is.
[Amit Varma]: And we have too much of a sort of a centralized system and that kind of works against it.
[Amit Varma]: You know, why not just have a whole bunch of states competing with each other to govern
[Amit Varma]: better and to attract people and to attract capital and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: Because we have nowhere near the federalized kind of system that we should though I having
[Amit Varma]: articulated this aside, you know, when you mentioned partition, you mentioned the inevitable
[Amit Varma]: violence of partition and that word inevitable strikes me and I think it's an apt term.
[Amit Varma]: And I think it's I would apply it to where we are today and say that this was inevitable
[Amit Varma]: because my sense is that one, our society was always like this, but why is it so bad
[Amit Varma]: today?
[Amit Varma]: Why is it amplified so much?
[Amit Varma]: And I turn to this concept I picked up from Timur Kuran's 1999 book, Public Lies, Private
[Amit Varma]: Truths, where he came up with the concept of preference falsification.
[Amit Varma]: And he gave the example of the Soviet Union.
[Amit Varma]: Till the last years of the Soviet Union, nobody in that place spoke against the state because
[Amit Varma]: they thought they were the only ones who felt that way, who felt that anger.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, you know, they hid their preference.
[Amit Varma]: That was preference falsification.
[Amit Varma]: And the example Kuran gave us, look, at one point there was something called a preference
[Amit Varma]: cascade where people realized that, hey, they're not the only ones.
[Amit Varma]: Everybody feels like them.
[Amit Varma]: And then eventually, it seems like it happened almost overnight.
[Amit Varma]: But people didn't change their minds overnight.
[Amit Varma]: They could just express themselves.
[Amit Varma]: And I think in a negative sense, a similar thing happened with social media, where I
[Amit Varma]: think people within our society were fundamentally bigoted and sexist and casteist and all of
[Amit Varma]: that.
[Amit Varma]: But it wasn't it was not something you could express in polite company.
[Amit Varma]: You felt guilty about it.
[Amit Varma]: It was something you held within you.
[Amit Varma]: And with social media, you suddenly realized that, damn it, everybody feels like me.
[Amit Varma]: And then you become emboldened to express yourself openly.
[Amit Varma]: And you don't need like politicians stop dog whistling because they can just say things
[Amit Varma]: directly.
[Amit Varma]: They don't need to dog whistle anymore.
[Amit Varma]: So, so the hatred that we see around us has found expression in modern times because of
[Amit Varma]: technology and social media, but has not been created in modern times.
[Amit Varma]: It was always there simmering beneath the surface.
[Amit Varma]: And it was bound to come out at some point.
[Amit Varma]: And the other thing that you sort of mentioned where you speak about imagining in India the
[Amit Varma]: necessary to imagine in India, you know, I think it was a grand task done by well-meaning
[Amit Varma]: men with the best of intentions.
[Amit Varma]: But I also think that it failed because that imagination, when it happened was done by
[Amit Varma]: a group of elites and the India they were imagining was not the India there was.
[Amit Varma]: And in trying to force fit the India of their imagination into the real India, they failed
[Amit Varma]: because it tried to go top down and not bottom up like one, you know, trope that I keep revisiting
[Amit Varma]: on my shows is how, if you look at our constitution, it was essentially a liberal constitution,
[Amit Varma]: nowhere near as liberal as I would like, but relatively, it was essentially a liberal constitution
[Amit Varma]: imposed on an illiberal society.
[Amit Varma]: And one you can also meta question about whether such an imposition can be liberal itself.
[Amit Varma]: But therefore, it was bound to fail that Gandhi was right where he said that you have to change
[Amit Varma]: society from within, top down interventions will fail.
[Amit Varma]: And I think we see, you know, the folly of that act of imagination today.
[Amit Varma]: And I would say that if elites today try to imagine a new India into being, it is bound
[Amit Varma]: to fail in the same way.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't think it's a bad thing that elites and all those kind of elites are no longer
[Amit Varma]: in power, because they were foolish and they failed.
[Amit Varma]: And we didn't get anywhere with that.
[Amit Varma]: What we need to do is make society more liberal, if that is possible.
[Amit Varma]: And I believe it is possible, but I believe it's very difficult and we are not really
[Amit Varma]: moving towards that so far.
[Amit Varma]: So just a bunch of sort of thoughts on, you know, what we were speaking about.
[Amit Varma]: So do you have something you'd like to respond to?
[Guest]: I was thinking about the inevitability of some things, you know, as this peculiar thing
[Guest]: called a nation when you don't even speak the same language.
[Guest]: We say we have a common history, but parts of the South, parts of the Northeast, parts
[Guest]: of the West have very, very distinct and individual histories.
[Guest]: I don't really agree with the fragmentation theory.
[Guest]: I think in practice, you'll find that it's a much less utopian and more messy thing.
[Guest]: You know, Balkan violence is what you're sort of mean.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: Quite aside from being anti-national.
[Guest]: But let me get back to a few things, I don't think that this country was imagined into
[Guest]: being entirely by a handful of elites.
[Guest]: One of the things that one of our major national parties has forgotten, actually, is how broad
[Guest]: its origins were as a big tent and how diverse the group of people and politicians who gravitated
[Guest]: to the Congress in that time were.
[Guest]: I don't think that we should idolize anything, whether that is the party presently in charge
[Guest]: or the Congress of Gandhi's time, you know, to see things through the lens of adulation
[Guest]: and how fantastic they were.
[Guest]: What the Congress really was, was a mass movement.
[Guest]: And I'm stressing that mass to say that I think where Gandhi and the other leaders extraordinary
[Guest]: achievement was, was to carry a huge proportion of the body politic along with them, to rouse
[Guest]: them to a fever of longing for this ideal country.
[Guest]: Set us against that and we're not going to discuss ideas of India because, you know,
[Guest]: that's such an old and trash debate.
[Guest]: But there is the dream of the Begumpura, you know, the ideal place where without caste,
[Guest]: without communal differences, without religions, there's also apparent and longing for that.
[Guest]: Now let's bring technology in.
[Guest]: Curiously enough, one of the areas where I'm optimistic about is after seeing the damage
[Guest]: done across the globe by big tech and by the weaponization of tech as a tool to spread
[Guest]: very successfully narratives, feelings, attitudes, beliefs of hatred.
[Guest]: One of these questions that we keep asking ourselves, oh, were we always like this, were
[Guest]: we always hateful?
[Guest]: And I think of that old, you know, it well, you know, that Buddhist meditation story about
[Guest]: the two wolves.
[Guest]: You know, you have two wolves, one destructive, one enormously creative, one benevolent, one
[Guest]: hostile.
[Guest]: There's four wolves, I get what you're saying.
[Guest]: But you know, benevolent, creative one side and hostile and destructive on the other.
[Amit Varma]: You wanted a wolf when you were a child.
[Amit Varma]: But anyway, that's an aside.
[Amit Varma]: But yeah, people have to read your book and learn about.
[Guest]: Of course, I wanted a wolf, who doesn't?
[Guest]: I don't want a wolf, but I find this very strange.
[Guest]: Anyway, so to get back to these two wolves, it's it's a simple question.
[Guest]: It's the one you feed.
[Guest]: And we pay too much emphasis on are we like this, are we like that, do we have this in
[Guest]: our national character?
[Guest]: Yeah, where are people's attention being directed?
[Guest]: What are they consuming?
[Guest]: And our belief, you know, in the fullness of a personality in independent of this is
[Guest]: touching but deeply misplaced.
[Guest]: Every one of us, in addition to having that unbreakable seed of a self inside, is also
[Guest]: basically a component of a mixture of everything that we have consumed, everything that we're
[Guest]: taking in, and most seriously, where we are directing our attention to.
[Guest]: So you know, as dismayed as I've been by the consequences of this technologically driven
[Guest]: and enabled hate, a simple example, you know, you've seen what Twitter is these days.
[Guest]: Imagine a Twitter where for just one day, it is not possible to abuse Kashmiris, Muslims,
[Guest]: Bengalis, liberals, seculars, for one day, it's not there.
[Guest]: And you can see it and those are our pet hates, other people have different pet hates.
[Guest]: But for that one day, discourse would be that much freer, people's blood pressure would
[Guest]: not be that high, their sense of being under threat and being attacked would be much, much
[Guest]: lower.
[Guest]: In effect, if you could cut that out, you would change the stream itself, you would
[Guest]: change where people were looking.
[Guest]: If your attention has been directed to hate, it's not just because people love hating or
[Guest]: because we have this ancient enemy or whatever, it's simply because hatred in the short run
[Guest]: is politically extremely lucrative, right?
[Guest]: Run a riot or mini riot or a set of, you know, demolitions or destructions of people's homes,
[Guest]: and you will win an election.
[Guest]: It's as simple as that.
[Guest]: If there wasn't a coordination between the two people would not do it.
[Guest]: If for 8-10 years, the people who have been most concerned with spreading propaganda,
[Guest]: most diligent about it, most engaged in this project, and who have also mastered the tools
[Guest]: that were available to everybody, right from the start of this decade onwards, then don't
[Guest]: blame technology per se for being a purveyor of hate.
[Guest]: What it shows you silently is that if you take the other projects as seriously, and
[Guest]: let me just say this on mic so that we have this, spread love.
[Guest]: What's your first reaction?
[Guest]: Your first reaction is, what the hell yaar, cynicism, laughter, you know, sirf pyaar batao.
[Guest]: What kind of ussi message is that?
[Guest]: That's what we think of love, right?
[Guest]: We don't think of love or loving each other or being compassionate or living together
[Guest]: as good things.
[Guest]: We think of them as prissy things.
[Guest]: How do you change that messaging?
[Guest]: People are smart here.
[Guest]: If you really want to change it, you can.
[Guest]: But that has to be not just a political project, it has to be a social project.
[Guest]: Is it possible?
[Guest]: Yes, because in microcosms, it did help us live by each other's sides uneasily, imperfectly,
[Guest]: but still try, you know.
[Guest]: Cities like Delhi and Bombay and Calcutta have, honestly, Calcutta has a reputation
[Guest]: for being eclectic, but the same multivisions do operate.
[Guest]: There's a South Calcutta and a North Calcutta, there's a South Bombay and there's the rest
[Guest]: of Bombay as well.
[Guest]: I think we are imperfect in these projects, but I think we've done enough of the movement
[Guest]: of people from villages to the city.
[Guest]: The places that taught me in Delhi that we could live side-by-side, I don't want to romanticize
[Guest]: this, but unfortunately, this is actually a truth.
[Guest]: It was not the new slums, it was not the old grand residential colonies, which fall very
[Guest]: easily back, you know, the RWAs and the gated colonies.
[Guest]: Unconsciously, they will fall back into the habits of segregation and they will keep people
[Guest]: out.
[Guest]: You can see that the map of South Delhi itself is changing to be far more, you know, majoritarian
[Guest]: than it used to be and far less assimilative.
[Guest]: But it was the in-between places.
[Guest]: It was the Lajpat Nagar places which are grudgingly, but for money, you know, open to refugees
[Guest]: from all across South Asia.
[Guest]: And it was some of the slum clusters, by and large, not the new ones, because the new ones
[Guest]: almost always divide in terms of you've come from here, you hang out with people from where
[Guest]: you've come from.
[Guest]: The moment that they get a little older and a little more layered, people have to learn
[Guest]: to live together.
[Guest]: And you know, even if their version of living together is two communities sitting with an
[Guest]: edge and a border between them, one thing that I'm hearing in this time of hatred, effective
[Guest]: hatred, is we used to celebrate, but now we don't.
[Guest]: Our roads used to go past each other's house, but now we don't.
[Guest]: You can despair, or you can stop and think, wait a second, for all these years we used
[Guest]: to live together, where did we learn that?
[Guest]: Why aren't we paying more attention to that?
[Guest]: I think it's possible.
[Guest]: I just think that it is such a gigantic project and it requires such a shift internally, you
[Guest]: know, to our minds.
[Guest]: One of the reasons why I say that we can't afford despair is not because, okay, we're
[Guest]: part of this great battle that we're going to win.
[Guest]: But if you, anywhere in the world, including our country, if you are despairing because
[Guest]: the right wing is rising, well, you know, one thing we could learn from the right is
[Guest]: that they've sat there without power, in clusters that have been very divided, without much
[Guest]: in the way of resources, for well over 30, 40 years.
[Guest]: It's been, I forget how many years, but at least decades since Alice Munro wrote an incredible
[Guest]: short story about, you know, the battles that they were having over Darwin, okay.
[Guest]: Many many years later, you have book bands in America taking hold.
[Guest]: It's taken that much time to get to the place where you have power and you have agency as
[Guest]: a member of the rising right, or if your hate politics become effective.
[Guest]: It takes 40 years of engineering, 50 years of engineering.
[Guest]: So I ask you, is this the time to give up, or is this the time to actually start thinking
[Guest]: about these things seriously?
[Guest]: If you're going to preach love, then can you find a way to do it that makes people not
[Guest]: switch off the televisions immediately?
[Guest]: If you're going to find a practical reason for why love should triumph, make that argument.
[Guest]: In literature, in poetry, but most of all in politics.
[Guest]: So I'll come up with an observation.
[Guest]: Frankly, I don't think we can afford despair.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll come up with an observation that is bookended by the thought of spreading love.
[Amit Varma]: And first of all, thank you for, you know, you brought a smile to my face by mentioning
[Amit Varma]: Alice Munro, a writer I love so much, my favorite living writer by far.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll in fact link my favorite short stories by her in the show notes, because why not
[Amit Varma]: everyone should read them?
[Amit Varma]: She's amazing.
[Amit Varma]: Spreading love.
[Amit Varma]: The interesting thing is that I don't want to paint social media or Twitter as all bad
[Amit Varma]: because you know, one of the things I've realized is that there's a lot of joy to be had from
[Amit Varma]: Twitter if you curate your feed properly.
[Amit Varma]: That what you really have also on Twitter is you are all the time exposed to the best
[Amit Varma]: minds in the world thinking aloud for your benefit, which is pretty remarkable enough.
[Amit Varma]: You know, and there's a small group of people, for example, who'll share poetry, you'll write
[Amit Varma]: about books and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And I would call that spreading love.
[Amit Varma]: But that's not so dominant.
[Amit Varma]: And that's really, that's in a sense, silent.
[Amit Varma]: The trend that I see what social media does is that the way it polarizes us really is
[Amit Varma]: that we go on social media, everybody wants to have a sense of community and tribe and
[Amit Varma]: all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So people will typically join ideological tribes at the extremes of the left and the
[Amit Varma]: right.
[Amit Varma]: And then they want to the incentives are obviously to raise the status within that tribe.
[Amit Varma]: And the way to do it is by attacking people on the other side, never addressing arguments,
[Amit Varma]: but just attacking and snarking, and so on, and then attacking people on their own side
[Amit Varma]: for not being pure enough.
[Amit Varma]: And that tendency to swing towards the extremes, because that's the only way you can rise in
[Amit Varma]: status is something that you see in the real world.
[Amit Varma]: And in our politics as well, like, you know, there was a time where a political scientist
[Amit Varma]: uses term called the median voter theorem, where the idea was that if you just take the
[Amit Varma]: US as a simple example for a moment, because there are two large parties, and that's it,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the two parties may swing in whatever directions during the primaries, but in the
[Amit Varma]: main election, they would always sort of swing towards the center.
[Amit Varma]: It's all like the metaphor drawn for this is of ice cream vendors at a beach, let's
[Amit Varma]: say there's one ice cream vendor at a beach, he can be anywhere along it.
[Amit Varma]: But if there are two, the incentive is to be as close to the center as possible, those
[Amit Varma]: two vendors may start out at the edges, but then the closer they get, the more optimal
[Amit Varma]: it is for them in terms of people walking by.
[Amit Varma]: And eventually, you'll have them right next to each other, neighboring ice cream vendors
[Amit Varma]: in the center of this pathway.
[Amit Varma]: So what you would typically have expected in the 2016 presidential elections in the
[Amit Varma]: US, for example, would be Hillary Clinton versus Jeb Bush, because they were from different
[Amit Varma]: parties, but they were pretty much identical in their politics, the differences are just
[Amit Varma]: surface.
[Amit Varma]: But they were really similar, really mainstream, beholden to the similar set of interest groups,
[Amit Varma]: big money interest groups, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: Where it fell apart was in Trump, because he was just not part of the picture at all.
[Amit Varma]: And politics swung to the extremes and just as the right swung to the extremes.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't even know if it's fair to call them the right because Trump took the party
[Amit Varma]: in Republican Party in directions which had nothing to do with the values of the Republican
[Amit Varma]: Party at all.
[Amit Varma]: Right?
[Amit Varma]: He was like a black swan, like his economics is just the opposite of Republican economics
[Amit Varma]: in his opposition to trade, for example, very so much like Bernie Sanders.
[Amit Varma]: But the point being that they swung to the extremes, and they're still swinging to the
[Amit Varma]: extremes today, because that is how today you rise within a party.
[Amit Varma]: And an example of that would be that Dharam Sansad at the end of the last year, when you
[Amit Varma]: had this whole bunch of saints or godmen or whatever all in quote marks, giving these
[Amit Varma]: incredibly incendiary speeches calling for genocide and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And my sense there is that that's this drive towards extremism playing out.
[Amit Varma]: Because if you look at the incentives of the leaders there, you know, it's it's a competition
[Amit Varma]: who can rouse the crowds more who can stand out more and the only way to do that is not
[Amit Varma]: by preaching love, but by swinging towards the extreme.
[Amit Varma]: So I think if it was one guy giving a speech alone, it would not have been so toxic.
[Amit Varma]: But because you have all these people competing with each other, there are no limits, all
[Amit Varma]: bets are off.
[Amit Varma]: And as you know, the political theorist Carl Schmitt famously said, perhaps a century ago
[Amit Varma]: that politics is all about the other you need an other in politics, you know, spreading
[Amit Varma]: love does not win you votes, spreading hate does.
[Amit Varma]: So that's sort of just how it is.
[Amit Varma]: So I want to talk about this, therefore, also, in the context of like, if we dive back to
[Amit Varma]: feminism for a moment, right, both Kavita Krishnan and Manjuma Bhattacharya recently
[Amit Varma]: spoke about how we have to see that there is a difference between feminism on the ground,
[Amit Varma]: people who are actually out there in the real world doing things making women's lives better
[Amit Varma]: off, as opposed to a lot of the toxic posturing that you see on social media for from armchair
[Amit Varma]: warriors.
[Amit Varma]: And this is my articulation, none of them use these words, I'm saying this.
[Amit Varma]: And that's something that interests me.
[Amit Varma]: Because what I find in a lot of the woke politics, for example, is a sense of identity as something
[Amit Varma]: immutable.
[Amit Varma]: And you get a mirror image of this in the right.
[Amit Varma]: And I feel that that's incredibly disturbing.
[Amit Varma]: Because as you know, I'm, for me, the ultimate value is in individual rights and consent
[Amit Varma]: and autonomy.
[Amit Varma]: You know, no one should be pinned down to an identity of birth and one that they did
[Amit Varma]: not choose.
[Amit Varma]: And speaking of identities can be useful as a tool of analysis.
[Amit Varma]: But when you use it to pass judgment on people and to shut people out of the discourse, and
[Amit Varma]: so on and so forth, I think that can kind of get very toxic.
[Amit Varma]: And when it comes to sort of that whole notion of spreading love, like I was reading bell
[Amit Varma]: hooks recently, and was struck by how much she talks about compassion, including compassion
[Amit Varma]: for men, including compassion for her father, and so on.
[Amit Varma]: It's a very nuanced kind of view, where you're seeing everyone as victims, where you're trying
[Amit Varma]: to understand where they come from.
[Amit Varma]: But there is a certain strain, not just of feminism, but any ism that you express online,
[Amit Varma]: which has no space for this nuance, which must push for the extremes, which must pass
[Amit Varma]: judgment on the world, which must condemn and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: So being someone who's used Twitter from its early days, being someone who's had the lived
[Amit Varma]: experience of engaging with feminism over these decades of, you know, even if you haven't
[Amit Varma]: at, for some of this time, as you put it, you haven't been an activist, you've been
[Amit Varma]: a participant or whatever, what is your sense of what's kind of happening here?
[Amit Varma]: Because while I certainly call myself a feminist, and, and I can't understand how anyone would
[Amit Varma]: not be one male or female, you know, I speak with older feminists who find, who find some
[Amit Varma]: of this, what is happening on social media, sort of disquieting, to the extent that Manjumma
[Amit Varma]: in fact said that these days, these days, I don't even call myself a feminist, because,
[Amit Varma]: you know, even though she studied it and written on it, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: So what's sort of your response to this?
[Guest]: Lierd, to begin with, I'm not comfortable with the term woke politics, though I understand
[Guest]: what you mean.
[Guest]: I think that's too broad an umbrella to encompass the many movements that have also flourished
[Guest]: on social media, not just social justice warriors or whatever, but movements where your social
[Guest]: media presence is an accurate mirror of your life and work offline, you know, we're back
[Guest]: at something that you talked about earlier, which was authenticity.
[Guest]: And I think what you are picking up on is inauthentic politics and the power of that
[Guest]: inauthentic politics.
[Guest]: Trump, whom you started off by mentioning, changed everything with a simple shift.
[Guest]: It didn't matter what he was saying, and it did sometimes, it's just that people could
[Guest]: not take their eyes off him.
[Guest]: A few voices early on said starve him of oxygen, but people were unable to look away.
[Guest]: With the Dharamsad and Sads that you mentioned, they're escalating, but there's no percentage
[Guest]: to being, I think there the problem is slightly different as with Trump.
[Guest]: It's that what you're seeing online can be amplified and used to create real danger,
[Guest]: real violence offline, right?
[Guest]: So your impact is far higher than your presence on social media.
[Guest]: But social media is a world of shadows.
[Guest]: It's not a world of substance.
[Guest]: Increasingly I find that I am disengaging.
[Guest]: This is again a very personal response.
[Guest]: I stay on Twitter partly because there's the addictive hook of it.
[Guest]: And you know, my two addictions are basically caffeine and Twitter at this point.
[Guest]: And in part too, I tell myself weekly, it's to stay informed, but I find myself following
[Guest]: the feeds that are not thoughtless positivity, which is a genre that just gets up my nose.
[Guest]: You know, that whole, no, no, think good thoughts, be bright and happy.
[Guest]: The good morning WhatsApp forward philosophy of life, I cannot be having time or space
[Guest]: for that because often that's a plea to you to disengage completely.
[Guest]: That's a plea to you to look away from the truth of what is happening here and elsewhere.
[Guest]: Having said that, I find myself drawn to feeds that are thoughtful, immersed, but not directly
[Guest]: about the topic of the day, the trending political person of the day, the controversy of the
[Guest]: day.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And those feeds are run by people like Paul Holdengraber, by Maria Popova, by Rana Safi
[Guest]: as well by Rabi Alamuddin.
[Guest]: They feeds that give you a sense of what the whole spread love thing can be.
[Guest]: It's so easy to mock that, by the way, I'm, I'm aware that I've opened myself up to mockery.
[Guest]: But let me put it this way, if somebody is shouting a toxic, I don't even want to say
[Guest]: it on, even though it's said so often, hateful nationalist slogan into the air, demonizing
[Guest]: part of our citizenry.
[Guest]: What prevents us from saying, saare jahan ke achcha, mazav nahi sikha tha, aapas mein
[Guest]: bair rakhna.
[Guest]: I think what prevents us is a lack of belief in that.
[Guest]: And people sense insincerity, one of the reasons why haters on social media are powerful is
[Guest]: because people sense that the hatred is authentic, it is coming from a true place, right.
[Guest]: And that's very seductive.
[Guest]: Instead of the hard work of that not woke politics, but that a certain kind of politics
[Guest]: demands.
[Guest]: If you're a feminist, I think it's very uncomfortable, believing in something deeply, whether it's
[Guest]: feminism, or free speech, or equality for all, because or a better environment, whatever
[Guest]: it is, that politics will start to change you, right.
[Guest]: And you will start to question your choices.
[Guest]: And sometimes you will be extremely uncomfortable with your own actions.
[Guest]: And that's the way it should be, you know, a good politics, a healthy politics should
[Guest]: change us.
[Guest]: Why do I have the freedom movement so much at my forefront, I think, again, because of
[Guest]: direct political situations were to thought experiment, I've sometimes wondered about
[Guest]: what would they have been like on social media, you know, I can't imagine that, but I can
[Guest]: imagine that I can imagine that in the volume of the persuasion, the efforts at persuasion
[Guest]: that were made, not just by our own independence movement, but by practically any movement
[Guest]: that I can think of, whether it's feminism, Indian or otherwise, has put a great deal
[Guest]: of time and attention into what we would call advocacy, but what I would call the art of
[Guest]: persuading people to sit down and listen to you.
[Guest]: So if we can't articulate love, just leave that thought to one side, as we continue with
[Guest]: this identity, I hate to say it, if you're a Kashmiri Muslim, at this point, you don't
[Guest]: have the luxury of walking away from your identity, as much as you might plead for your
[Guest]: individual self to be recognized, if you're a Palestinian, if you're somebody who is currently
[Guest]: experiencing tremendous oppression, because of your identity, you don't have the freedom.
[Amit Varma]: I think what I mean is identity being used as something against you.
[Guest]: When you're talking about identity politics, what you're picking up on is something that
[Guest]: is also inauthentic, but it's that admonitory streak in us, that smugness that I am better
[Guest]: than you, let me show you how to do this.
[Amit Varma]: What I mean is this, like earlier in this conversation, you've spoken about caste, right?
[Amit Varma]: Now, what I mean about the toxicity of identity politics is someone then pointing a finger
[Amit Varma]: at you and saying, oh, she's a privileged Savannah woman, she has no right to talk about
[Amit Varma]: caste.
[Amit Varma]: And I have a problem with that.
[Amit Varma]: I think we all have a right to talk about whatever we want to talk about and whatever
[Amit Varma]: concerns us.
[Amit Varma]: You know, if I am, for example, concerned that the anti Muslim hatred that is spreading
[Amit Varma]: through our country today, I have a right to speak about that as well.
[Amit Varma]: I love my country.
[Amit Varma]: I don't want to, you know, so it's sort of this kind of thing where a label is put on
[Amit Varma]: you and then you are told you can do this or you can't do this, that this is not for
[Amit Varma]: you to speak about, that you are Savannah or you are white and shut the F up.
[Amit Varma]: And what you really see in a lot of the extreme discourse in the US is that whiteness is being
[Amit Varma]: conflated with white supremacy, almost.
[Amit Varma]: It feels like that in a lot of the discourse.
[Amit Varma]: And to me, going to that extreme just becomes a problem.
[Amit Varma]: So that's the sense I mean it in.
[Amit Varma]: Of course, if you're Muslim today in India, you can't escape your identity.
[Amit Varma]: Of course, if you're a woman in India, you can't escape that you're a second class citizen.
[Amit Varma]: You know, at the level of analysis, of course, I mean, I'm totally with you.
[Amit Varma]: But when your identity is used against you, then that is the thing I have an issue with,
[Amit Varma]: you know, so that that's sort of if you get where I'm coming from.
[Guest]: I know, but I would comment this from a slightly different perspective.
[Guest]: I would ask an additional question, the person who's saying you should keep quiet because
[Guest]: you are this and not that, are they coming from a space of pain, in which case, listen
[Guest]: to them a little bit and just see, you know, are they trying to, what is the intention?
[Amit Varma]: So I'll just add something to that, that I understand that compassionate point that someone
[Guest]: is coming from a position of pain or justified anger.
[Guest]: That's not the only thing I wanted to say, sorry, I'll just quickly in half a sentence
[Amit Varma]: finish this.
[Amit Varma]: What I also see happening in this politics is an embrace of victimhood, you know, where
[Amit Varma]: everybody wants to be a victim in some way or the other, so they can be offended by something
[Amit Varma]: someone said, and then they can pass judgment on that person for an identity of birth they
[Amit Varma]: did not choose, or they can look for gotcha moments and take, you know, and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: look at imagined sort of grievances.
[Amit Varma]: And that's something that I do have an issue with.
[Guest]: That's fine.
[Guest]: Having an issue with it is not the problem.
[Guest]: I would say that there are two things that are crucial out here.
[Guest]: The people who are hypothetically saying you don't have the right to speak, which is what
[Guest]: this boils down to, do they have the power to silence you?
[Guest]: The shaming cycles that happen on social media, the controversies that boil up even within
[Guest]: teaching, there was this, I'm going to sidetrack just a bit, but you know about the Kate Clanchy
[Amit Varma]: controversy.
[Amit Varma]: No, I'm sorry.
[Guest]: All right.
[Guest]: So this became a huge thing.
[Guest]: She's a teacher with highly awarded memoir about teaching in London's inner city schools
[Guest]: and teaching children who are often refugees, often from very poor, underprivileged backgrounds.
[Guest]: And she was taken to task two years after her novel was awarded by three writers of
[Guest]: color who pointed out that some of her descriptions of these children were borderline racist or
[Guest]: fully racist or very, very reductive at the least, you know, they seem to lack compassion
[Guest]: or they put these children into particular boxes.
[Guest]: In an ideal world, there would have been room for both sides to talk to each other, for
[Guest]: Clanchy to maybe listen and say, okay, let me have a chat with my publisher, right?
[Guest]: And let me see what I can do.
[Guest]: These are the changes I'm on board with.
[Guest]: These are the things I don't feel I should change.
[Guest]: From both sides, this turned into a thing where the women who included, you know, writers
[Guest]: like Monisha Rajesh and Jimine Suniman and others, were subjected to barracking and abuse.
[Guest]: Kate Clanchy was demonized on the other side.
[Guest]: It ended up being, it's still running through cycles, you know, with people alternately
[Guest]: seeing Clanchy as a monster or as a savior figure or monstering the women who called
[Guest]: her out or, you know, elevating them to a level that they may not have chosen for themselves.
[Guest]: And it's become profoundly unproductive, okay.
[Guest]: It hasn't pushed the central issue further.
[Guest]: In fact, the central issue has been lost in this.
[Guest]: Why am I picking this as an example instead of the many other, you know, juicy controversies
[Guest]: we could pile on to?
[Guest]: Because I think we are all seeing a problem when discussion is shut down or brought to
[Guest]: a halt or goes into extremely thin territory, extremely unproductive, unprofitable, very
[Guest]: arid territory, non-creative territory, okay.
[Guest]: I don't have a problem with shutting up if somebody says, you as a Savarna privileged
[Guest]: woman have had the mic for too long.
[Guest]: Can you make space for someone else?
[Guest]: That's fair.
[Guest]: That's absolutely fair.
[Guest]: And I would be not just accommodating, I would think that, yeah, you know, historically speaking,
[Guest]: why not hand over?
[Amit Varma]: But if somebody says...
[Amit Varma]: That's fair, but the problem is when you're condemned for being Savarna, which was not
[Amit Varma]: in your control.
[Guest]: There's no action involved with it.
[Guest]: It's a pejorative.
[Guest]: Yeah, that's only a hurt feeling.
[Amit Varma]: I don't care about that so much.
[Guest]: You know, that's something I see honesty as the other person's problem.
[Guest]: If they want to put condemnation into something that I can't help, they're coming at it from
[Guest]: a position of hurt, pain, anger or whatever that maybe I'll never understand.
[Guest]: And I try to hold space for that, but again, I don't have much time for that because I
[Guest]: don't think it moves either of our positions forward.
[Guest]: My question is often whether it's a book or whether it's something else, it's focused
[Guest]: on outcome.
[Guest]: In literature, a lot of this debate is framed as who do you have the right to write about?
[Guest]: And instinctively, I think I can see both sides.
[Guest]: I can see the argument for saying, write with some sensitivity.
[Guest]: But if you take the whole don't write people whom you don't know, think to its extreme,
[Guest]: we're all going to be writing monologues that take place in our own heads.
[Guest]: And that are only about ourselves.
[Amit Varma]: And J.R.R.
[Amit Varma]: Tolkien wasn't a hobbit.
[Guest]: Because see, that's a lovely laugh line, but it takes away from the real hurt that people
[Amit Varma]: have felt.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, I get it completely.
[Amit Varma]: I get it completely.
[Amit Varma]: When, you know, clueless foreign writers write about something that I know and a world that
[Amit Varma]: I've lived in and get it completely wrong, I feel angry.
[Amit Varma]: And it's fair for me to express my literary criticism of what they have just messed up
[Amit Varma]: and got wrong.
[Amit Varma]: But everyone should nevertheless be free to write about whatever they want.
[Guest]: I think what I resist and resist profoundly is because I have resented it from the right.
[Guest]: This whole dictatorial thing about we are offended, you can't write about this.
[Guest]: You can't paint that.
[Guest]: You can't think this, you know.
[Guest]: I would not stand for it personally on the left or the liberal side of the world either.
[Guest]: But that's just me.
[Guest]: I don't want to make the rules for the whole world.
[Guest]: So what we're coming towards is, do you really want to set down rules about these things?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: When you're speaking about compassion, you can't enforce compassion on somebody who has
[Guest]: been deprived of an opportunity to speak all their lives.
[Guest]: And maybe sometimes, you know, just stand up and take your hurt feelings and it's okay.
[Guest]: You still have a way to speak.
[Guest]: You are still going to continue to speak.
[Guest]: That's fine.
[Guest]: I think what you're noticing though is emblematic of a larger problem and that is that this
[Guest]: entire set of politics, whatever you want to call them, cancel culture is a term that
[Guest]: the right uses.
[Guest]: But this narrowing of argument down to the rituals surrounding a set of things in the
[Guest]: hope that this will somehow, you know, provide a greater piece of justice.
[Guest]: The rituals cannot replace the actual action for justice.
[Guest]: And I think that just because people are liberals or on the left, that does not make them less
[Guest]: prone to being vengeful.
[Guest]: In the early days of Twitter, I look at the times when, you know, I've given into the
[Guest]: temptation to be morally superior or to tell somebody off and here's the truth.
[Guest]: It feels great in the moment.
[Guest]: Afterwards, if you're at all reflective, a day later, you're thinking about that and
[Guest]: you feel very small telling somebody how they should live their lives or what they should
[Guest]: think or whatever.
[Guest]: Getting down, taking the slightly confused set of arguments back to strictly the literary,
[Guest]: artistic, creative world and off Twitter for a second, I think it is problematic to say
[Guest]: literature should be free, everybody should have the right to write, everybody else.
[Guest]: That just opens a door for somebody to write very hatefully and with a lack of respect
[Guest]: or lack of understanding, which is worse, you know, about specific groups of people.
[Guest]: But the more we get into rules and the more we get into policing, the more we start to
[Guest]: resemble the forces that we hate and we have to watch out for that.
[Guest]: You have to be careful.
[Guest]: The second thing is that this strain, Ed Luce, who I keep quoting Financial Times columnist
[Guest]: today and I'm sorry, it's just that I read a string of particular people.
[Amit Varma]: You're also being tribal.
[Amit Varma]: You're part of the FT tribe.
[Guest]: I am being tribal.
[Guest]: And you know, unconsciously so, but it is an argument that struck me with some force
[Guest]: and he's been debating it back and forth.
[Guest]: But he says that part of America's problem is that the left's concerns and liberal concerns
[Guest]: and democratic concerns cannot be so narrow that they lose, you know, sight of what a
[Guest]: wider politics is.
[Guest]: So in all this discussion about, you know, who gets to speak where or Twitter policing
[Guest]: or whatever it is, aren't we losing sight of the much, much broader battles ahead in
[Guest]: terms of justice and equality and all of that?
[Guest]: Aren't these, at the end of the day, aren't a lot of these very esoteric and very narrow
[Guest]: pursuits?
[Guest]: I don't mean that they are unimportant.
[Guest]: I just mean, I don't mean to trivialize them either.
[Guest]: But sometimes I just think that these things that you care so passionately about on Instagram
[Guest]: or Twitter or whatever, can be very in-group concerns.
[Guest]: And if you're focusing on that, if you're focusing on, you know, the etiquette of how
[Guest]: to respond to X, Y or Z or join in this particular cultural boycott or another, is what you're
[Guest]: doing enabling the bigger picture or are you getting lost in a very small debate?
[Guest]: Something that I think we're both frustrated with, because again, we've discussed this
[Guest]: as friends elsewhere, is the tendency of a certain kind of liberal line of argument to
[Guest]: go into, you know, opposing hate, but saying, oh, but we did it also back in the day, collapsing
[Guest]: in a heap, you know, saying that we don't have any moral ground and getting into a tangle
[Guest]: of relatively minor points, you're leaving the main issue on the table unaddressed in
[Guest]: this paroxysm of shame and guilt and, you know, all of that.
[Guest]: So somewhere I think what we're looking for is, as much as the right is also lost across
[Guest]: the world, you remember a time when being conservative or being right wing did not have
[Guest]: to mean that you were associated with hate politics.
[Guest]: So as powerful as the surge of hate is, I would argue very strongly that the right has
[Guest]: lost its compass completely, you know, I know that's a very broad based argument.
[Guest]: But I would argue that very strongly for India, America and parts of Europe, for sure.
[Guest]: If you're defining yourself as a right wing party in France, with your anti-immigration
[Guest]: policy and losing sight of everything else that is supposed to go into being part of
[Guest]: the traditional right, then you no longer know who you are.
[Guest]: If your identity as a right wing in America is built on, we will hate these minorities
[Guest]: and cut off the rights of women, then you've lost contact with your own heritage, right?
[Guest]: And India, I mean, the same goes, one thing I used to like a little bit, not about Nehruvian
[Guest]: politics, but about the general strain of mainstream politics out here is that there
[Guest]: were so many contradictory opinions coming at each other.
[Guest]: And in just the same way, I don't want to say this as a sweeping indictment, but I think
[Guest]: liberalism per se is struggling to hold on to the thread of the story, isn't it?
[Guest]: If we get sidetracked by relatively minor, relatively petty issues, I think the one area
[Guest]: where I'm in complete rather than occasionally partial agreement with you is on the whole
[Guest]: thing of if we're so busy cancelling each other, you know, Gandhi had particular flaws,
[Guest]: this person cannot speak, this person by the standards of our time is bad.
[Guest]: You need to watch out with that, you know, the politics of purity are dangerous on either
[Guest]: side of the fence.
[Guest]: There is no such thing as pure territory.
[Guest]: We live in not just in an imperfect time, but we have to find a way to live with the
[Guest]: imperfection of ourselves.
[Guest]: We need fewer heroes.
[Guest]: We need fewer perfect people, but we do need to be able to make arguments with passion
[Guest]: and belief and to hold space for each other.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's what I keep saying.
[Amit Varma]: It's almost a cliche on my show, channeling Whitman, that people contain multitudes, which
[Amit Varma]: applies to Gandhi and Nehru and Ambedkar and Vajpayee and so many others who we tend to
[Amit Varma]: see in black and white ways.
[Amit Varma]: And I agree with everything you said, and I have exactly the same concerns.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, I agree with what you said about the right losing its compass.
[Amit Varma]: The two things I'd add there is I'm not sure the frames of left and right are even relevant
[Guest]: anymore.
[Guest]: I was struggling as I was speaking, I was thinking this is not really how do we describe
[Amit Varma]: it?
[Amit Varma]: No, I mean, the way I think listeners will know exactly what you mean.
[Guest]: So that's fine.
[Guest]: What are the terms for this?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, the frames that I would, you know, 20 years later, if you ask me, I would not
[Amit Varma]: want people to think of the world in terms of frames or left or right, which are meaningless
[Amit Varma]: and muddied, but across freedom and authoritarian, across consent and coercion.
[Amit Varma]: To me, those are the frames that, for me, consent is the ultimate value and coercion
[Amit Varma]: is really, really bad, you know, and the right and the left across the board seem to have
[Amit Varma]: no problem with coercion at all across many margins.
[Amit Varma]: And just as the right as you put it have lost their compass, I think so as a left, I mean,
[Amit Varma]: my issue with the bigotry on both sides is that I am the bigotry on the right doesn't
[Amit Varma]: worry me so much because I wear it on their sleeve.
[Amit Varma]: It is what it is.
[Amit Varma]: But the bigotry on the left is dressed up in this sanctimony, which, you know, is much
[Amit Varma]: harder to counter.
[Amit Varma]: And thankfully, what you know, we've both been referring to and all the posturing and
[Amit Varma]: all the noise and the extremes is a vocal minority, sorry, most people aren't like that
[Amit Varma]: most people, the sense that I get are a silent majority, and perhaps the chilling effect
[Amit Varma]: makes them more silent than ever, because anything they say can be can get them cancelled
[Amit Varma]: or can get an online mob on them.
[Amit Varma]: And I've had mobs from all sides come down on me.
[Amit Varma]: So there is that chilling effect at play.
[Amit Varma]: But my hope there is that there is a silent majority and at some point in time, the toxic
[Amit Varma]: effect of the vocal minorities will not sort of matter so much.
[Amit Varma]: And on that note, let's take a quick commercial break, though I don't have a commercial, but
[Amit Varma]: I sense we might need a break.
[Amit Varma]: And on the other side of that, we'll continue with your personal journey and perhaps talk
[Amit Varma]: about quieter subjects than than these depressing subjects, which we've been depressing, but
[Amit Varma]: rousing, depressing, but rousing, indeed.
[Amit Varma]: Long before I was a podcaster, I was a writer.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, chances are that many of you first heard of me because of my blog India Uncut,
[Amit Varma]: which was active between 2003 and 2009 and became somewhat popular at the time.
[Amit Varma]: I love the freedom the form gave me, and I feel I was shaped by it in many ways.
[Amit Varma]: I exercise my writing muscle every day and was forced to think about many different things
[Amit Varma]: because I wrote about many different things.
[Amit Varma]: Well, that phase in my life ended for various reasons.
[Amit Varma]: And now it is time to revive it, only now I'm doing it through a newsletter.
[Amit Varma]: I have started the India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com where I will write
[Amit Varma]: regularly about whatever catches my fancy.
[Amit Varma]: I'll write about some of the themes I cover in this podcast and about much else.
[Amit Varma]: So please do head on over to indiancut.substack.com and subscribe.
[Amit Varma]: It is free.
[Amit Varma]: Once you sign up, each new installment that I write will land up in your email inbox.
[Amit Varma]: You don't need to go anywhere.
[Amit Varma]: So subscribe now for free.
[Amit Varma]: The India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back again to the scene in the unseen because this was our umpteenth break and I'm
[Amit Varma]: chatting with my good friend Ilanjana Roy on on her life and her thoughts.
[Amit Varma]: And there's really so much to explore that we could go on for another five hours, but
[Amit Varma]: we won't go on for that long.
[Amit Varma]: One of the things that struck me when I read The Girl Who Ate Books, and I was sort of
[Amit Varma]: reading your backstory as it were, is how much you remember of your ancestors, right?
[Amit Varma]: So you've got besides your parents, you've got grandparents from every side, you've got
[Amit Varma]: grand uncles, you've got older ancestors who are taking loans from Armenians and doing
[Amit Varma]: this and doing that.
[Amit Varma]: And there's just so much action all over.
[Amit Varma]: And there is also a richness of things in the sense, you know, I did this one paragraph
[Amit Varma]: which you may not, you know, consider a big deal, but I remember it, where you write quote,
[Amit Varma]: My Thakur Ma, Bibobati Devi, Baba's mother was a writer in an unfussy way, producing
[Amit Varma]: short stories in Bengali with the same practice flick of her wrist that she used to turn out
[Amit Varma]: roasted coconut treats and puffed rice and jaggery moas.
[Amit Varma]: She kept her writings in a black leaded tin trunk, her homemade sweets in an old lactogen
[Amit Varma]: tin, both containers equally battered and utilitarian.
[Amit Varma]: And stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And that lactogen tin really speaks to me.
[Amit Varma]: You know, when I was in Chandigarh recently, we sold my father's house, I was clearing
[Amit Varma]: out the stuff, we chose to give most of it away or get rid of it, gave thousands of books
[Amit Varma]: to a local community library in Delhi, I just kept a few as artifacts in a sense, because
[Amit Varma]: most of my reading is sort of on Kindle and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And it was difficult in the sense that I know that none of what I was choosing to part with
[Amit Varma]: had any practical value at all.
[Amit Varma]: And yet it is a texture of my growing up and my childhood and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And that made me think about whether it is a blessing or a curse to have a past that
[Amit Varma]: has some kind of richness in it.
[Amit Varma]: And my past does not have too much richness in it, it's just the parents.
[Amit Varma]: And then I have no sentiments, very few memories, it's not there.
[Amit Varma]: But even this, to sort of say that, okay, this part of my life is gone forever, and
[Amit Varma]: we'll live only in memory.
[Amit Varma]: And that was kind of tough.
[Amit Varma]: And at one point, you cherish what you had, and you lament the loss.
[Amit Varma]: But at another point, it also frees you from not having the burden of that past from being
[Amit Varma]: just able to move forward and realize that most of it in terms of the physical things
[Amit Varma]: that it was embodied in, most of those things are not essential to you at all, you want
[Amit Varma]: to live an essential life.
[Amit Varma]: Like one of the things that my wife and I were talking about as we went through this
[Amit Varma]: exercise is how we have too many things as well, which burden us down and hold us back.
[Amit Varma]: And you want to sort of move to a more minimal kind of life, you don't have so many things
[Amit Varma]: because things are not important.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, technology has given us the luxury and the privilege to be able to do
[Amit Varma]: that because we can keep all our 1000s of books in digital copies.
[Amit Varma]: And we can keep all our work in a digital form uploaded to the crowd.
[Amit Varma]: We don't, you know, physical things aren't a big deal anymore.
[Amit Varma]: If my laptop starts working, I'll get another one and that will have exactly the same things
[Amit Varma]: on it as this one does.
[Amit Varma]: But given that your sense of the past is so rich, given that your memories contain all
[Amit Varma]: of these things, how do you view that coming to where you are?
[Amit Varma]: Because and also in a related sense, you know, when you think of home, what is your sense
[Amit Varma]: of home?
[Amit Varma]: Like I had a recent episode with Max Rodenbeck, where I asked him this question, and he grew
[Amit Varma]: up in Cairo.
[Amit Varma]: And he said, it's Cairo, but it's not the Cairo that is there today.
[Amit Varma]: It's a Cairo of memory, and therefore a Cairo of imagination, because memory and imagination
[Amit Varma]: are so closely linked together.
[Amit Varma]: So what is your sense of this rich past you've written about it so much?
[Amit Varma]: You live in it still, obviously, because one must keep going back to that.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, I don't even know if there's a question, but I just sort of wanted your
[Amit Varma]: impressions and your thoughts of this.
[Guest]: Actually, I'm surprised because with The Girl Who Ate Books, I think that's the only one
[Guest]: of my books where I've gone even somewhat autobiographical.
[Guest]: And because so much of that book is about my encounters, you know, it's the business
[Guest]: standard interviews that I did with so many writers.
[Guest]: There are standalone essays that are about the history of Indian writing in English and
[Guest]: that are very abstract.
[Guest]: Some of them are about early pioneers in writing, and some of them are about the growth of history.
[Guest]: I don't think I'd realized that I had written as much about my family as I did.
[Guest]: I'm going back to why I did that, and I don't think it was to boast or to show off.
[Guest]: I think I was looking really for the literary heritage.
[Guest]: My grandmother's trunk, one of the saddest scars on my heart is that she lifelong was
[Guest]: a published author.
[Guest]: She used to write poems and short stories that at that time I didn't read.
[Guest]: And some of them were published in little magazines in Bengali and all of that.
[Guest]: And after she died, her trunk went to a member of the family who is now also passed on.
[Guest]: And I was very, I didn't want to ask just after her death for the stories back and all
[Guest]: of that, but after about nine months, 10 months, I said, do you think I could take copies of
[Guest]: all her writings?
[Guest]: And she said, oh, yes, of course you can.
[Guest]: Where are they?
[Guest]: And I said, they were in the black trunk.
[Guest]: She said, oh, that trunk, it was filled with rubbish papers and they were moth eaten and
[Guest]: I just threw them away.
[Guest]: There was nothing of value in there.
[Guest]: And I don't think she meant any harm, but it meant something to me.
[Guest]: I've always felt that phantom side of not just my grandmother's personal writings disappearing,
[Guest]: but it touched on a deep, deep wound, which was the lack of women's histories.
[Guest]: Often when you look at collections of writers, except up to the modern day, where it's changed
[Guest]: a little bit, the archives are usually kept men of letters, their notes, their letters,
[Guest]: etc. are all kept and maintained.
[Guest]: And it's that much harder to put together the biography of India's women writers.
[Guest]: And suddenly, you know, my tiny personal loss was moving into this much wider absence, to
[Guest]: some extent.
[Guest]: With the rest of my family, I think I was writing about them to try and fix something
[Guest]: in my mind, that old question of where do you come from?
[Guest]: What stream?
[Guest]: Some of it was gratitude, some of it was saying, you know, thank you to all of you who gave
[Guest]: me books and reading or allowed me to pester you for stories.
[Guest]: My uncle, you know, used to just sit there patiently, he was an architect.
[Guest]: And he used to sit there patiently with one or the other of us attached to his leg like
[Guest]: little limpets, telling a story after story.
[Guest]: My mother, my father was so generous with his books.
[Guest]: And I feel that because so many people don't have that in their lives, it's more important
[Guest]: for us.
[Guest]: I don't mean to be sonorous, but I did feel the need to acknowledge that.
[Guest]: In terms of where is home, that used to be a little bit of a heartache because my husband
[Guest]: and I have never bought a home.
[Guest]: And we both come from the quintessential Calcutta families where own homes are either mired
[Guest]: in legal trouble or have long since crumbled.
[Guest]: Home for me was maybe not so much the homes where I grew up in government circles, or
[Guest]: there was a period when my father was posted to Calcutta, and we shifted home houses in
[Guest]: Delhi 13 times in the course of just a few years, which was salutary, you know, it took
[Guest]: me out of the cozy and very, very insulated cocoon of government life where by and large,
[Guest]: more than actual comfort, what you have is an absence of discomfort.
[Amit Varma]: You see what I mean?
[Guest]: And it was a wonderful introduction to the city.
[Guest]: At the time, I think it was a little bewildering for, you know, a teenager to be shifting bus
[Guest]: routes so often.
[Guest]: But when I went to Calcutta, I spent about four years or so studying at La Martiniere,
[Guest]: which was as open a school as I've said, as my former convent was a little on the closed
[Guest]: side.
[Guest]: And the house that my grandmother had is again part of the vanished heritage of the city.
[Guest]: It was a wonderful old red brick house, you know, built with one room sprawling into each
[Guest]: other.
[Guest]: It was a fusion of styles, Indian and Bengali meeting British with a huge veranda that opened
[Guest]: out onto a lawn and turrets and things and books lining every room, every room, you know.
[Guest]: It was also a warm and hospitable and convivial house and that was my strongest sense of home.
[Guest]: And it was broken down more than 30 years ago.
[Guest]: And it's instructive to see how that absence has become for some family members, a real
[Guest]: ache, you know, when a home is taken away and our home just went in the normal course
[Guest]: of things.
[Guest]: It wasn't bulldozed by a cruel administration.
[Guest]: But for some people it's become a permanent ache, an absence not just of a physical home,
[Guest]: but without that you can get unmoored.
[Guest]: You can literally not know how to see where you come from, you know, or what you belong
[Guest]: to or what grew you up or shaped you.
[Guest]: In terms of shaping me as a person, I think my other home was always, it sounds so trite
[Guest]: to say this, but it is so true, Amit, it was in books.
[Guest]: You know, that was because that was the one constant in parts of my life, both as a child
[Guest]: and an adult where I was switching houses a lot.
[Guest]: You can make your home in the books that you read.
[Guest]: And so there was never a point where I felt truly unhoused.
[Guest]: And I just want to add that, you know, most of my movings around have not been particularly
[Guest]: traumatic.
[Guest]: It's not been like a partition or the refugee coming out or whatever.
[Guest]: But you still feel that absence of a center.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Over time, the need for things has shifted.
[Guest]: I am a sentimentalist and one of my great pleasures is not having, you've seen the house,
[Guest]: it's not particularly, you know, show offy, you know, I don't think it's done to any style.
[Guest]: It's basically a friendly conglomeration of cats and very old furniture and books all
[Guest]: mingling together.
[Guest]: And I don't think we've ever sat down and said, should we design this better?
[Guest]: You know, even though I love walking into well-designed homes myself, but I've just
[Guest]: never got around to doing that for myself.
[Guest]: The things that are precious to me are things like books that are signed, a poem from Shahid,
[Guest]: a letter from Krishna Subti, you know, those things, a painting by a friend, a photograph
[Guest]: by a friend, those are treasures, you know, an autograph from Toni Morrison or Harold
[Guest]: Pinto, Amitav Ghosh or Salman Rushdie, those are things I will treasure for life because
[Guest]: there's something about handwriting that really, really speaks to me.
[Guest]: In terms of other possessions, every so often I give away a huge bunch of books to a local
[Guest]: library and I feel that much freer, you know.
[Guest]: With furniture, it's a blessing and a curse when it's family furniture.
[Guest]: In a way, you become the keeper of a family heritage whether you want to or not, and it's
[Guest]: very difficult to let go of that.
[Guest]: If for no other reason than other people in the family would mind if they came to your
[Guest]: house and found those things not there, which is such an odd thing, but anyway.
[Guest]: And it can be reassuring as well, it can be a little part of the past.
[Guest]: But increasingly, I find that my pleasure in owning things insofar as that was ever
[Guest]: a part of my life, that has disappeared, you know.
[Guest]: The things that have given me the greatest sense of challenge or curiosity in my life
[Guest]: have been conversations and encounters with people and in that I've been richer than most.
[Guest]: You know, that is really that and also something I just take for granted but that a lot of
[Guest]: other writers struggle with.
[Guest]: Because a long time ago, I chose not to have a formal job.
[Guest]: I work as a condominist, I do other things as well, but I don't have to check in to an
[Guest]: office and I've always had huge amounts of control over my time.
[Guest]: And we've been talking about privilege in so many different ways through this conversation.
[Guest]: One of the greatest privileges you can have in this or any other country as a woman is
[Guest]: to have that control over your time.
[Guest]: And of course, you know, there's family duties even if you don't have children, but those
[Guest]: are compared to most women's lives where you don't have the freedom to think about where
[Guest]: you want to spend your time.
[Guest]: That is huge.
[Guest]: Let's just get back to this whole thing of possessions and how they define you.
[Guest]: I think for a lot of people, the first time that they move into a home of their own without
[Guest]: their family stuff is maybe the first time that they see themselves with some clarity.
[Guest]: And I remember a friend of mine who was also a writer coming to my study for the first
[Guest]: time and seeing in tremendous disappointment, oh, but you know, you don't have a view.
[Guest]: You look out over the backyard and a mango tree and I always thought that you would have
[Guest]: a room with a view and a fancy study.
[Guest]: And I said, but you see, the one room where I don't need a view is actually the study
[Guest]: because once you get in to the writing, you don't notice anything else.
[Guest]: And space, you know, we talk a lot about writing space and all of that.
[Guest]: I think the journalist training, I learned how to write anyway.
[Guest]: I wrote The Wildings and The Hundred Names of Darkness and part of The Girl Who Ate Books
[Guest]: on the dining table in our Jangpura house.
[Guest]: I wrote The Rest of the Girl Who Ate Books in an empty house of a friend's in Goa.
[Guest]: And I think that was one of my happiest writing experiences in a strange way because the house
[Guest]: being so, it had some sticks of furniture, but otherwise it was just me and the monsoon
[Guest]: and the book.
[Guest]: And I don't think it made the writing better, you know, we keep hoping that miraculously
[Guest]: space will turn you into a great writer and no, you know, those essays are very much,
[Guest]: you can see something growing in them, but they're very much apprentices at the same
[Guest]: time.
[Guest]: And I wrote Black River and edited a lot of my anthologies in a kind of study, which is
[Guest]: also a laundry room.
[Guest]: And some of the fact that it's those two spaces at the same time keeps it here.
[Guest]: Do I aspire to have my own study someday, maybe in a theoretical way, but in actual
[Guest]: fact, some years back, I was lucky enough to get a residency at Bellagio in Italy.
[Guest]: And we were given these incredible studies, they really look after you out there.
[Guest]: And it's wonderful intellectual experience because you're meeting other practitioners
[Guest]: in different fields, not just writers.
[Guest]: And every few evenings or so somebody gives a talk about their work.
[Guest]: And it's like a college education, it really is.
[Guest]: But the first day, I walk into the bedroom is beautiful enough.
[Guest]: And then I find that I've been given a study that overlooks Lake Como, and has perfectly
[Guest]: appointed with the desk here and the printer there.
[Guest]: And it's only your space and this peace and quiet and even your lunch is going to be dropped
[Guest]: outside your door.
[Guest]: And I sat down and I fell apart and I couldn't write for the first day.
[Guest]: I just couldn't write.
[Guest]: There was something in me that said, how can I now create work in my haphazard way, when
[Guest]: the space demands serious work?
[Guest]: You know, how can I write a frivolous line?
[Guest]: How can I write a bad line?
[Guest]: And I'm joking about it, but it was a real problem.
[Guest]: I just sat there for a day, totally stressed out looking at this beautiful lake and saying,
[Guest]: I'm supposed to be a writer capital W out here.
[Guest]: And until now, I've been a writer small w, which is what I'm comfortable with.
[Guest]: And it was only the next day when I was said, okay, you know, just get over yourself and
[Guest]: write something.
[Guest]: And then things were fine.
[Guest]: So I don't know about that formal study.
[Guest]: You know, would it would I approach it?
[Guest]: Would I use it?
[Guest]: Would I look at it with great satisfaction and arrange my books and the books I love
[Guest]: most around there and then never use it and just go back to a dining table?
[Guest]: Where do you create your work?
[Guest]: What enables you?
[Guest]: Are you asking me?
[Guest]: I was just thinking aloud and I was yes, I am because you know, you're a writer too.
[Guest]: And I was asking, I guess what you need.
[Guest]: I need silence more than anything else.
[Guest]: I can't write in a cafe, but I can write almost anywhere else.
[Guest]: I can write in a, you know, bus coming down from the hills.
[Guest]: If everyone's sleeping, I can write on a railway station because somehow that noise doesn't
[Amit Varma]: disturb me.
[Amit Varma]: That's a remarkable ability.
[Amit Varma]: In my case, the difficulty that I've had is something that doesn't seem to have been a
[Amit Varma]: difficulty with you, which is just being sort of able to sit down and get the writing done
[Amit Varma]: and focus on the processes like I can when I am, you know, when I have to, when I'm so
[Amit Varma]: inclined, write anywhere that's doable.
[Amit Varma]: But in general, I am prey to distractions.
[Amit Varma]: That is something that I keep fighting, though I really can't complain about having a study
[Amit Varma]: because I have now, you know, a few years ago, I asked myself the question, what is
[Amit Varma]: happiness for me?
[Amit Varma]: What will make me happy?
[Amit Varma]: And I came up with three things.
[Amit Varma]: And one of them was that I want a room full of books.
[Amit Varma]: The second thing was I want that room to be air conditioned.
[Amit Varma]: And the third thing was that I want to sit comfortably on a lazy boy or such like in
[Amit Varma]: that room and read books.
[Amit Varma]: And I had the books and I had the room and I had the air conditioning and I ordered a
[Amit Varma]: lazy boy right away that same day.
[Amit Varma]: And then I said that, okay, I have no reason to complain, I've got everything.
[Amit Varma]: And where I currently am in Mumbai is I've got a home studio, cum a writing room, I've
[Amit Varma]: got a nice huge sit stand desk from Ikea, I've got a fantastic view from the 27th floor
[Amit Varma]: of a building, I've really got it all.
[Amit Varma]: But I think finally, the study you have to build is in your head where you have to find
[Amit Varma]: that space in your head where you can actually sit down and write and free yourself from
[Amit Varma]: distractions, which is something that I struggle with.
[Amit Varma]: But I'll, you know, I'll segue from that brief self-indulgent digression brought about by
[Amit Varma]: your question and ask and turn it on you and ask you what is your idea of happiness and
[Amit Varma]: how has it been redefined?
[Amit Varma]: Because for me, a fundamental shift was figuring out when I reached middle age, that when we
[Amit Varma]: are young, we can make the mistake of focusing too much on goals, that I want to achieve
[Amit Varma]: this, write this many books, get this many awards, be a writer with a capital A. Whereas
[Amit Varma]: the happiness is in the small joys, those goals can actually be toxic, because they
[Amit Varma]: can give you anxiety and stress and frustration and sadness.
[Amit Varma]: But if you just revel in the small joys, because happiness is a choice, it's not something
[Amit Varma]: that happens to you, you can choose to be happy.
[Amit Varma]: And one way of choosing to be happy is by seeing the many ways in which you are fortunate.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, just reveling in that and that for me would perhaps mean now that I think
[Amit Varma]: of it, you said it so beautifully, writer with a capital W, that could mean turning
[Amit Varma]: from a writer with a capital W to turning with the small w writer, right?
[Amit Varma]: So how have you sort of looked at your life?
[Amit Varma]: Like, what did you want when you were younger?
[Amit Varma]: What do you want today with the passage of years, like, if you had to go back to the
[Amit Varma]: young Nilanjana of 25 years ago, and give her advice that would make her happier in
[Amit Varma]: her journey?
[Amit Varma]: What would you tell her?
[Guest]: I tell her to stop worrying about what other people thought.
[Guest]: And I would just tell her to trust her instincts, and to trust her talent for joy, because that
[Guest]: was one of the gifts I always had.
[Guest]: I don't know why.
[Guest]: But it's been a great gift just to some people.
[Guest]: It runs hand in hand with the tendency to some melancholy or obsession when the country
[Guest]: is going through a phase like this.
[Guest]: But I think one of the things I realized over time was, I was often retrospectively happy.
[Guest]: You see, it's now looking back, I don't see a time ever in any decade that I remember
[Guest]: that I've read about when India was perfect.
[Guest]: But I do know empirically speaking, that the 1990s and the 2000s, for all the flaws of
[Guest]: the country and for all the moments of, you know, when one person or another was persecuted,
[Guest]: I do know that the air of the country was freer.
[Guest]: And in retrospect, I look back and instead of choosing to be sad or dismayed today, I
[Guest]: tell myself that we were very lucky to know what it's like to be in a reasonably free
[Guest]: country and to have that expectation from the people who are supposed to serve us and
[Guest]: who actually rule us.
[Guest]: In terms of writing for years, I think I lived a very stressed out life in my 20s and 30s.
[Guest]: The 30s parts of it were difficult beyond measure, I don't want to talk about all of
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: But I was still dealing with the debris from the past.
[Guest]: On the surface of things, I could tell myself that whatever sadness I was dealing with was
[Guest]: shared by many other people who are similar.
[Guest]: But the truth is, I had suppressed some of that pain for many years and when it came
[Guest]: bursting out, it came bursting out in ways that were extremely destructive.
[Guest]: And it's funny how you come through that kind of despair into a kind of honesty.
[Guest]: At some point, you realize there's no point really being false to yourself.
[Guest]: There's no point also sorrowing too much about a past that cannot be changed.
[Guest]: And you take one step after another into, we keep talking about healing, but I think
[Guest]: back into life, into a life that you had so briefly but emphatically abandoned.
[Guest]: And for me, writing became easy when I gave myself permission to feel.
[Guest]: For years, I'd been held back by the fact that I had been such a reader.
[Guest]: And I used to just start off a project and then stop thinking, you know, but Nadine Gordimer,
[Guest]: but Alice Munro, how can I ever write anything of that beauty, but this, but that.
[Guest]: And at some point I said, okay, I don't care, you know, there's a story that's bursting
[Guest]: out of me.
[Guest]: There are characters walking around in my head, there's this thing I can see.
[Guest]: And let me at least just get that down to paper.
[Guest]: And when I did, and I had a book, I said, I don't care if people love, I don't care
[Guest]: if they don't love this, let me just do it for the work.
[Guest]: And somehow that freed something in me.
[Guest]: Of course, I don't mean that you just write any old thing down.
[Guest]: There's a value to, you know, the whole thing of not just craft, but trying to find your
[Guest]: voice and trying to be true to the story and messing it up and, but at the same time trying
[Guest]: to do your best to it.
[Guest]: At some point, you see, what happened was, now if I ask myself what I lack, what's getting
[Guest]: in the way of happiness, there's uncertainty, there's sadness about the pathways that many
[Guest]: of my country people have chosen.
[Guest]: There's great fear for a lot of people I love, who have already been touched by the grimness
[Guest]: of these times.
[Guest]: All right.
[Guest]: And none of that is in my power to change, except in very small ways through acts of
[Guest]: tiny empathy or something of the sort.
[Guest]: I'm not an activist, I'm not a politician.
[Guest]: I have a powerful voice sometimes.
[Guest]: But these days, it's become such a game of hopscotch for everybody to figure out what
[Guest]: they can say and what they can't say.
[Guest]: And I find that even friends who used to be very outspoken and very fearless have been
[Guest]: ground down a little bit.
[Guest]: That's the unhappy side of things.
[Guest]: And the greatest part of my unhappiness is just, you know, like a child, you're saying
[Guest]: again, I wish people were good to each other, I wish people stopped fighting each other,
[Guest]: I wish there was no war, I wish this, I wish that, right?
[Guest]: The part where I draw an abiding amount of happiness from is something that sounds cheesy,
[Guest]: but that I actually believe that everybody should do.
[Guest]: I started a gratitude practice many years ago, along with a little bit of meditation.
[Guest]: The meditation practice, which I continue is probably a failure, I'm still the same
[Guest]: person I was, I still have the same flaws, I still have a temper, you know.
[Guest]: It has not turned me into a wonderfully spiritual, serene person.
[Guest]: It has just deepened a few things for me and the value of that has been inexpressible.
[Guest]: But I started first very self-consciously, and then with increasing gladness, a gratitude
[Guest]: practice and it taught me one of those old truths, you know, it's like Dorothy in The
[Guest]: Wizard of Oz, there's no place like home, you're already where you need to be, you just
[Guest]: need to click on the ruby snippers thrice.
[Guest]: And I think what it taught me is there are things I could theoretically change, I could
[Guest]: ask for a home or a study or this success or that success, but there's never been a
[Guest]: time in my life that I've been without friends, without love, without books, without joy,
[Guest]: without curiosity, even in the saddest, most despairing moments, there's been solidarity.
[Guest]: There's been a movement towards more integrity, and by integrity I don't mean just verbal
[Guest]: lip service honesty, I mean an integrity of being, you know, where all the disparate parts
[Guest]: of you start to come together and where you start to hopefully live and write for yourself.
[Guest]: I don't like being selfish, but I do have a lot of self-respect these days, and to my
[Guest]: surprise I find that my happiness is here, my happiness is right here, in the middle
[Guest]: of imperfection and chaos and all of that.
[Guest]: But I don't think there has been a day when I haven't been aware, and I don't mean in
[Guest]: a smarmy way, I just mean that there hasn't been a day when I haven't been aware of the
[Guest]: limitless possibilities of life, writing, reading, life, creating, just being around
[Guest]: friends we are given so much.
[Guest]: And it's helped me to pay attention to that, it's helped me to just feel not, you know,
[Guest]: a writer capital W, but just somebody who is part of this flow that we are all immersed
[Guest]: in whether we know it or not, of just trying to, you know, just trying to spend our lives
[Guest]: not necessarily doing something grand or grandiose or, you know, filled with vast meaning, but
[Guest]: tiny little things, you know, that taken together just make your life a little better and hopefully
[Guest]: appeal to others as well, just that.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you mentioned not wanting to be selfish, but I was just advising a friend
[Amit Varma]: of mine yesterday on a situation that he's found himself in.
[Amit Varma]: And I told him that when you want to be empathetic, you should always also remember to be empathetic
[Amit Varma]: towards yourself.
[Amit Varma]: And not just empathetic towards yourself at this current moment, but also perhaps empathetic
[Amit Varma]: towards your future self.
[Amit Varma]: And think about how everything that you do today and every choice that you make today
[Amit Varma]: impacts your future self as well.
[Amit Varma]: So that's kind of just thinking aloud a broader question again, which is also in a sense,
[Amit Varma]: I guess, a personal question, but is also a broader question, because it'll get you
[Amit Varma]: talking about the country in these times, if you are all fish swimming in water and
[Amit Varma]: not noticing the water, that water also in India, that water also is our linguistic heritage
[Amit Varma]: in the sense of wonderful languages we are surrounded by, like one of the ways in which
[Amit Varma]: I think this is a great country to be a writer in is not just that we are surrounded by so
[Amit Varma]: many stories that there is so much happening around us, but also that we have access to
[Amit Varma]: so many languages that by default, all of us are sort of multilingual.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, that has an importance you've written in your book about Bankim Chandra
[Amit Varma]: Chatterjee's experiments with, you know, writing in English and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And you've also mentioned earlier in this conversation about the dilemmas over authenticity
[Amit Varma]: and the different languages and you mentioned you don't write in Hindi because of Akat.
[Amit Varma]: How deep a role does being able to read and write and listen and talk in other languages
[Amit Varma]: play in even sort of what we write in English, for example, because I would imagine that
[Amit Varma]: our imaginative life and all of that is just deeper and richer because we have access to
[Amit Varma]: so many worlds and languages are a big part of that.
[Amit Varma]: And as a corollary to that, is it then a worry that there might at some point be a certain
[Amit Varma]: homogenization happening in terms of the languages that we speak, where if you look at every
[Amit Varma]: language like you correctly, I think mentioned earlier in this conversation, that if Hindi
[Amit Varma]: is a river, there are hundreds of tributaries, you didn't use these words, but I'm stuck
[Amit Varma]: with river and tributaries now, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And there's a danger then that and of course, there was a political movement to go towards
[Amit Varma]: a particular kind of Hindi where all you know, the Shudh Hindi where Persian and Arabic and
[Amit Varma]: all those influences has been stripped away and that movement can never succeed because
[Amit Varma]: people speak the way they speak.
[Amit Varma]: But in the same way that you know, bananas were sort of homogenized, like I had an episode
[Amit Varma]: with our mutual friend Vikram doctor a long time ago on Indian food, and he spoke about
[Amit Varma]: the Cavendish banana, that there is something called a Cavendish banana, which India export
[Amit Varma]: that you know, it goes from India to the world.
[Amit Varma]: And then out there, it is mass produced, and it has these certain merits, which are, you
[Amit Varma]: know, which work for it, one of them being that it stays well, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And then it completely dominates the Western landscape, and then they export it back here.
[Amit Varma]: And now it is rapidly replacing all indigenous kind of bananas, and we have a diversity of
[Amit Varma]: bananas.
[Amit Varma]: And somehow, if you go to a supermarket today, the chances are that all you'll find is a
[Amit Varma]: Cavendish banana unless you know, which local market to go to and where to look and all
[Amit Varma]: of that.
[Amit Varma]: And I worried that there might be sort of a similar thing happening to language in two
[Amit Varma]: ways.
[Amit Varma]: One is that English has become such a tremendous language of aspiration, that people just gravitate
[Amit Varma]: towards that.
[Amit Varma]: And there might be local, sort of local cultures which might be lost because of that.
[Amit Varma]: And, and also within the languages itself, there seems to be a mainstreaming, like a
[Amit Varma]: friend of mine who writes in a particular dialect of Kannada was sharing his sort of
[Amit Varma]: situation with me where he said that my instinct is to write in this Kannada, which I grew
[Amit Varma]: up in speaking, thinking and all that.
[Amit Varma]: But the point is that if I do this, you forget the wider market.
[Amit Varma]: But even within Kannada audiences, he'll be a tiny niche and may just die out because
[Amit Varma]: some dialects are dying, some languages are dying.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, given all the writing and the reading that you've done that you've read
[Amit Varma]: so much in multiple languages as well, which to my shame, I haven't, you know, what are
[Amit Varma]: what are sort of your thoughts on this?
[Guest]: I was thinking of J. N. Devi's work, Professor J. N. Devi's work, you know, the great scholar
[Guest]: who's been spent a lifetime practically now, championing, defending, tracking, mapping
[Guest]: the many languages that we have.
[Guest]: That river keeps coming back from time to time.
[Guest]: So you think of what happens to a river when it's dammed and when it loses its natural
[Guest]: flow and starts going stagnant.
[Guest]: That's what you do when you try to play power games with one language or the other.
[Guest]: What I find fascinating about English, it's been around only for three centuries.
[Guest]: It is a little bit of a strangler fig, you know, as a language where English comes in.
[Guest]: The language that I lost in between English, Bengali and Hindi was my father's language,
[Guest]: Uriya.
[Guest]: Because, you know, somehow you're trying to keep all of those, you need to speak Hindi
[Guest]: because you're in Delhi, Bengali is the home, you know, it just is home.
[Guest]: And English is the language in which you conduct your life.
[Guest]: You see what I mean?
[Guest]: You can have two languages to dream in.
[Guest]: Very few of us can dream in more than that.
[Guest]: So the fear among a lot of people who watch Indian languages is that you also don't want
[Guest]: a language, one of the big five or six, Hindi, Gujarati, Bengali, Tamil, Malayalam.
[Guest]: You don't want them to drown out the others.
[Guest]: I don't think we realize or we keep coming back in this conversation to what you value.
[Guest]: Do you value becoming a best-selling writer or do you value the work itself?
[Guest]: Is there a tension between the two things or can you make that work on the same page?
[Guest]: And with languages, it's an automatic belief that bigger, more speakers is better, robs
[Guest]: us of a lot of sweetness.
[Guest]: I remember when translators came to Hindi first, there's also a generational learning
[Guest]: with translation, right?
[Guest]: So the first translators of Hindi and Bengali would translate archaic Bengali into archaic
[Guest]: English and then we left with the language that was dead on the page, that had none of
[Guest]: the life of English or none of the life of Bengali either.
[Guest]: Over time, they've learned to dance, you know, translators like Arunava Sinha in Bengali
[Guest]: or, you know, a score of others, Kanyan Raman, etc.
[Guest]: They sing.
[Guest]: There's a recent translation of Alipura Gyan and Geetanjali Shree, of course, DZ Rockwell,
[Guest]: where you can sense these two languages in communication, you know, sort of overlapping,
[Guest]: dancing, but very comfortable with each other.
[Guest]: I think we, often the hunger for us growing up as young, aspirational parts of this new
[Guest]: modernizing India and modernity was a big thing.
[Guest]: The focus was on almost relentlessly on, you must learn French or Spanish or German or
[Guest]: something like that in order to be a true world citizen and who was saying, if you come
[Guest]: from the north or the east, why don't you want to learn Kannada, Telugu, Madhyama, Tamil,
[Guest]: you know, it took me years to understand the kind of legacy that we have out here.
[Guest]: The projects about sanitization, Vikram Dokta is wise with his story about the Cavendish
[Guest]: banana because it's not that it can't happen.
[Guest]: Give these things enough time and enough political force and money behind them and one dominant
[Guest]: kind of Hindi can take over or one dominant kind of any other language, English or whatever.
[Guest]: But if you notice how much Indians have changed English, first we came to it and we're writing
[Guest]: like the English many centuries ago, but we're taking away their daffodils and putting in
[Guest]: our Amalthas.
[Guest]: You know, we are writing like the golden and the silver poets, but somewhere there's an
[Guest]: Indian place setting at least moving in.
[Guest]: Then a few more generations go by, we start getting comfortable with this alien tongue
[Guest]: and then we start pushing it towards our forms of writing.
[Guest]: A few more generations and a Rushdie emerges before him, there's a JV Desani.
[Guest]: These rivers of language are alive.
[Guest]: What we endanger of in this country is choking off the tiny streams, you see, or even when
[Guest]: Gitanjali Shree won the Booker International, it was a big moment, but there was an immediate
[Guest]: sense of this will benefit Hindi language books.
[Guest]: This country has so many languages, why shouldn't it benefit all of those?
[Guest]: And as far as the West is concerned, and I'm speaking directly of the market here, not
[Guest]: of the people of the West, I found it tragic that people either separate Indian writing
[Guest]: in English from translations.
[Guest]: That's not how I read, that's not how anybody reads.
[Guest]: And you shouldn't feel ashamed about not reading in your local language, it's just, I know
[Guest]: everyone has a paucity of time and it's hard enough to keep up with reading in one language.
[Guest]: It's a pleasure to discover that, if you ever have the time for it at some point of time.
[Guest]: We don't like going back to being learners, but it is one of the greatest joys of your
[Guest]: life.
[Guest]: I felt like my Hindi and Bengali was stronger and I could write in them with as much fluency
[Guest]: as I read.
[Guest]: How has reading in them changed me?
[Guest]: Inexorably, I don't really know whether I'm an Indian English writer or I'm just an Indian
[Guest]: writer or whether I'm just a writer floating around in space.
[Guest]: But somewhere at the back of my English, there are all the worlds of an Asha Poornadevi or
[Guest]: Mahasweta Devi in Bangla.
[Guest]: I don't know how they influenced me.
[Guest]: I just know that they're there and I know that I can't imagine my, I don't have to choose
[Guest]: thankfully, but I can't imagine my writing without the poetry of Agye and Akshay Mukul
[Guest]: of course is going to be doing that biography, or I can't imagine it without the translations
[Guest]: I read of Manto's short stories or Ismat Chuktai, Kurutulain Haider, Amrita Preetam, there's
[Guest]: a world out there, they're mine, you know, and I love being able to claim all of them
[Guest]: from Girish Karnad to all the writers I love, they're mine, I don't have to choose between
[Guest]: those different heritages.
[Amit Varma]: They are yours and you should claim them, but you should also share some of them.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll end with my last question.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I could go on for another five hours, but maybe some other day.
[Amit Varma]: But so my last question is that, you know, why don't you recommend for me and my listeners,
[Amit Varma]: you know, books that have meant a lot to you that you just love, like not in terms of some
[Amit Varma]: objective merit or worthy books or whatever, but just books that mean a lot to you that
[Amit Varma]: make you smile, that make you feel something and that you'd like to share with me and my
[Amit Varma]: readers and you feel that we absolutely must, you know, as soon as this episode ends, start
[Amit Varma]: reading them right away?
[Guest]: Well, that's such a lovely question.
[Guest]: And I'm going to have to stop at just a few, but I would say if you're reading in the present
[Guest]: ish, you know, if you haven't yet, it doesn't have to be books that have just come out.
[Amit Varma]: Is that where you are?
[Amit Varma]: Anything at all from your childhood you mentioned in your book, you mentioned like the adventures
[Amit Varma]: of Dennis and all those Russian books from the childhood.
[Amit Varma]: You can go wherever.
[Amit Varma]: I mean.
[Guest]: There are so many books I've loved, but I think the ones that stay with me, all of Toni
[Guest]: Morrison's work, Salman Rushdie, two books in particular, Bharan and the Sea of Stories,
[Guest]: which was talismanic for me in the period when India was suddenly, you know, green constraint
[Guest]: and you felt that there was a khatam shuddh out there.
[Guest]: And somewhere, you know, his metaphor of that ocean of sea of stories, that's been very
[Guest]: meaningful to me that, you know, that lovely fable about the ocean can get choked, it can
[Guest]: even almost die, but that hope that someday it'll be unpolluted and the streams of stories
[Guest]: will run.
[Guest]: Poetry.
[Guest]: Jeet has a brilliant anthology out of a huge, you know, doorstopper of an anthology out
[Guest]: of English poetry, Indian poetry in English.
[Guest]: And I think it was Eunice together with Menonice Elgato, was that right, who had a huge anthology
[Guest]: out of just Indian poetry in general.
[Guest]: I'm going to stay on poetry for a while because I must recommend Priya Sarukhai Chhabra's
[Guest]: translations of Andal and Ranjith Hoskote's translations of Lal Deed.
[Guest]: Have I said Vivek Shanbhag's Ghachar Ghochar yet?
[Amit Varma]: You haven't, but that's one of my favourite books as well and what a translation.
[Guest]: All time favourites, all time favourites.
[Guest]: Definitely that.
[Guest]: So a book to read now, I was thinking of it recently, but Kurutunen, Haider's Aag Kadariya
[Guest]: River of Fire, for sure.
[Guest]: I should stop now because I think I'm recommending too much.
[Guest]: But there's no such thing as too much.
[Guest]: I just want to recommend a book for every category that exists, you see.
[Guest]: But if you love free speech, if you love thinking about societies and how they constructed Ursula
[Guest]: K. Le Guin, and three stories particularly, one was a classic, The Ones Who Walk Away
[Guest]: from Amidas, about the price you will pay for the perfect or not pay for the perfect
[Guest]: society, The Left Hand of Darkness, for sure.
[Guest]: In fact, most of her books, I'm going to not recite the entire list.
[Guest]: Alice Munro's short stories, I'm so glad that you like them too, but they've been an education
[Guest]: for me over the years.
[Guest]: Girish Karnad's plays.
[Guest]: If you want to understand today's politics, then again, I would recommend a great deal
[Guest]: of Mahashweta Devi's extremely wide over, including Mother of 1084, you know, in tribute
[Guest]: to all the prisoners out here.
[Guest]: In our own time, I'm partial to, there's too many nonfiction writers, so I'm just going
[Guest]: to leave them to one side and with great apologies or whatever.
[Guest]: But I would say if you really want a mix of a reading list for yourself, pick some poetry,
[Guest]: pick some plays, chuck a few novels on that heap, and pick any two histories or books
[Guest]: of nonfiction.
[Guest]: A book that I really want to recommend is by Ed Yong, you know, where he's writing about
[Guest]: animals and their perception of the world.
[Guest]: I know that's coming from left field, and I just said no nonfiction and I'm breaking
[Guest]: that rule.
[Guest]: But I like books like that because they wake your mind up, you know.
[Guest]: So I think we've.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah, we've gone through and in your book, you've mentioned how much you liked
[Amit Varma]: what is perhaps my favorite book of poetry from an Indian, which is Jejuri by Arun Kulatkar,
[Amit Varma]: which is so dear to me.
[Guest]: Astonishing also, Agha Shahid Ali's Country Without a Post Office, one of his early classics.
[Guest]: I could go on forever, but, you know, just maybe it's best to stop and use these as starting
[Guest]: points and let everyone do their own exploring in among their bookshelves.
[Guest]: But these are some of my favorites, these are not all of the books that have impacted
[Guest]: me.
[Amit Varma]: Did I just use impacted in that way?
[Amit Varma]: You used impacted, it's shocking.
[Amit Varma]: All my students are saying, but Amit says don't use words like these.
[Guest]: No, no, I can't believe I did that.
[Guest]: But let's see, there are books that I've loved, there's books that I've enjoyed, and there
[Guest]: are books that have shaped me at different parts of my life.
[Guest]: And one last one, you know, that's been enduring has been A.K.
[Guest]: Ramanuja.
[Guest]: His poems, his essays.
[Guest]: I think sometimes when a writer's essays is banned, you only see them through that lens.
[Guest]: But A.K. Ramanuja's translations of Sangam poets were among the first things that just
[Guest]: made me realize that the past is not yet over, that it's still something that can speak to
[Guest]: us directly across the centuries.
[Guest]: And everything that he wrote about our common heritage of folktales, how to read a myth,
[Guest]: how to understand it as part of our history, but not so rigid, not so damaging, something
[Guest]: that is open and expansive.
[Guest]: I think I gravitate instinctively to those Indian writers who made themselves at home
[Guest]: in the world.
[Guest]: And so the last one, one of my old favorites, Kabir, of course.
[Guest]: You can either read his poems in the original, or you can read Arvind Krishna Mehrotra's
[Guest]: radical re-translations and transmigrations of them, but just go for it either way.
[Amit Varma]: I love Mehrotra's collection of Kabir's work and Heraclitus once said that no one steps
[Amit Varma]: in the same river twice.
[Amit Varma]: And what you're sort of reminding us with this is that we all actually swim in the same
[Amit Varma]: river, you know, from the past to now and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: So thank you so much for coming on the show.
[Guest]: I'm glad we finally made it happen.
[Guest]: I know.
[Guest]: But thank you for letting me go on and on.
[Guest]: And I just hope I haven't tired your listeners out.
[Guest]: They will let you know that you haven't.
[Guest]: Thank you so much.
[Guest]: It was a pleasure.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.